[PAGE 1]
Learning collision risk proactively from naturalistic driving data at scale ∗
Yiru Jiao1,3, Simeon C. Calvert1,3, Sander van Cranenburgh2,3, Hans van Lint1
1 Department of Transport & Planning,
2 Department of Engineering Systems and Services,
3 CityAI lab,
Delft University of Technology, Delft, the Netherlands
ABSTRACT
Accurately and proactively alerting drivers or automated systems to emerging collisions is crucial for
road safety, particularly in highly interactive and complex urban environments. Existing methods
either require labour-intensive annotation of sparse risk, struggle to consider varying contextual
factors, or are tailored to limited scenarios. Here we present the Generalised Surrogate Safety
Measure (GSSM), a data-driven approach that learns collision risk from naturalistic driving without
the need for crash or risk labels. Trained over multiple datasets and evaluated on 2,591 real-world
crashes and near-crashes, a basic GSSM using only instantaneous motion kinematics achieves an
area under the precision-recall curve of 0.9, and secures a median time advance of 2.6 seconds
to prevent potential collisions. Incorporating additional interaction patterns and contextual factors
provides further performance gains. Across interaction scenarios such as rear-end, merging, and
turning, GSSM consistently outperforms existing baselines in accuracy and timeliness. These
results establish GSSM as a scalable, context-aware, and generalisable foundation to identify risky
interactions before they become unavoidable, supporting proactive safety in autonomous driving
systems and traffic incident management. Code and experiment data are openly accessible at
https://github.com/Yiru-Jiao/GSSM.
Keywords Road safety · collision risk · risk quantification · trajectory reconstruction · naturalistic driving data
∗Officially published in Nature Machine Intelligence, accessible at https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-026-01189-w
arXiv:2505.13556v5  [cs.RO]  22 Mar 2026


[PAGE 2]
1
Introduction
Road traffic safety remains a critical global concern. Over one million fatalities were recorded on roads due to traffic
accidents worldwide every year, as well as ten times as many injuries [1]. With advancements in vehicle safety
technologies and policy improvements, a significant number of fatalities have been reduced since 2010. However, this
reduction has plateaued in recent years, as evidenced by Figure 1(a). Notably, fewer than 6% of all traffic accidents
occur on high-speed motorways, as displayed in Figure 1(b). Instead, the majority of crashes occur on urban roads,
where the traffic situation is more complex due to various types of road users and their multi-directional interactions.
Given that 60% of the global population is expected to reside in urban areas by 2030 [2], improving traffic safety in
highly interactive urban environments has become both urgent and globally relevant.
2001
2006
2011
2016
2021
1.0
1.2
in millions
(a) Global deaths in road crashes over years
Estimated global deaths
95% uncertainty intervals
2001
2006
2011
2016
2021
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Number of accidents
in millions
(b) Accidents by location in UNECE countries
4%
5%
6%
Motorway percentage
Outside built-up areas
Inside built-up areas
Motorways
Figure 1. Statistics of traffic accidents. (a) Estimated numbers of fatalities due to road traffic accidents per year by the Institute for
Health Metrics and Evaluation [3]. (b) Distribution of traffic accidents that occurred in different locations from 2001 to 2021 in
27 countries where complete data are accessible. The data is sourced from the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
(UNECE) Statistical Database [4].
A core challenge lies in accurately quantifying collision risk in real time to allow for prevention before crashes happen.
Traffic safety research is traditionally grouped into two categories, reactive and proactive, based on whether the focus is
on ex post analysis or ex ante prevention. Reactive research identifies risk factors from real-world crashes to derive
improvements in road topology design and infrastructure safety monitoring [5] (see [6, 7] for relevant literature reviews).
Relying on historical crash data, such improvements are inevitably delayed after injuries and damage have occurred.
In contrast, proactive research anticipates potential collisions to enable timely interventions [8, 9]. This means being
alert to the precursors to collisions, such as near misses, hazardous interactions, and evolving traffic conflicts, which
potentially lead to crashes if not mitigated.
To address this challenge of proactive collision risk quantification, several methodologies have been explored in different
fields. The earliest established methodology is surrogate safety measures (SSM), also referred to as surrogate measures
of safety (SMoS) or criticality metrics within autonomous driving research [10–12]. Developed over decades since
the 1970s [13–15], SSMs estimate the likelihood or severity of potential collisions through physics-based indicators
designed for specific road user behaviour such as car-following and lane-changing. The underlying assumption is
that crash risk arises when the current situation will result in a collision unless immediate evasive actions are taken.
Well-known examples include Time-to-Collision (TTC), deceleration rate to avoid collision (DRAC), artificial potential
fields (e.g., safety field [16] and risk field [17, 18]), and other varying spatiotemporal measures. Although these
indicators are intuitive, traffic collisions are not the result of a certain type of road user behaviour, but involve various
types of interactions in diverse and dynamic traffic environments [19]. Therefore, the specifically designed SSMs lack
adequate context-awareness [20] to consider heterogeneous interactions, different types of road users, and broader
environment factors. This lack also limits the generalisability of SSMs beyond their designed conditions.
A methodology widely used in robotics and the control domain quantifies collision risk based on motion prediction
under uncertainty [21, 22]. It predicts the future positions or reachable sets of road users, propagates uncertainty
through these predictions, and assesses probabilistic violations of safety constraints (e.g., [23–25]). Risk quantification
in this methodology implicitly assumes that the uncertainties of road user behaviour can be sufficiently captured by
a stochastic model, which remains valid in safety-critical situations. In practice, this assumption is often violated by
aggressive, inattentive, or other anomalous behaviour that typically precedes crashes. To accommodate such more
complex uncertainties, recent studies have increasingly integrated data-driven prediction models [26, 27]. While these
models enhance context-awareness as traffic environments are incorporated, the challenge of model generalisability
persists in intensely interactive and safety-critical scenarios that are under-represented in normal training data. When
encountering such scenarios, the accuracy and reliability of risk quantification may degrade significantly.
2


[PAGE 3]
Facilitated by the rapid development of computer vision, a video-data-driven methodology has emerged since 2018
known as Traffic Accident Anticipation (TAA, see dedicated literature reviews such as [28, 29]). Its objective is to
provide early predictions of impending collisions by modelling the visual patterns across sequential video frames.
This is commonly achieved through supervised learning with real-world accidents serving as labels. The fundamental
assumption is the existence of representative visual cues before accidents happen, so that deep neural networks
can identify these cues. For example, vehicles deviating from their lanes may signal loss of control or evasive
manoeuvres [30], while motorcycles at high speed can indicate risk in urban areas [31]. Heavily driven by annotated
crash data, TAA faces a practical challenge of scalability. The infrequency and variety of traffic accidents, of which
the videos are inherently difficult to acquire, impede effective and reliable training [32]. Similar to the previous
methodologies, TAA models also struggle with generalisability to new contexts that differ, even slightly, from training
patterns.
In summary, to proactively quantify collision risk, existing methodologies share 3 limitations in
• scalability, leveraging large-scale everyday observations instead of relying on factual crashes;
• context-awareness, accounting for any information that can be used to characterise interaction [20] in addition
to road user behaviour, such as weather, lighting, and road conditions; and
• generalisability, covering a wide variety of traffic interactions from on motorways to at urban intersections,
and handling new contexts not seen in training data.
In this paper, we propose the generalised surrogate safety measure (GSSM), a novel approach to proactive risk
quantification of potential traffic collisions. GSSM evaluates how extreme a given traffic interaction deviates from
typical safe behaviour towards an unsafe state in the interaction context, outputting a continuous risk level and the
corresponding likelihood of a potential collision. This consideration of extreme interaction makes it possible to naturally
generalise from normal interactions to safety-critical situations. GSSM utilises neural networks to enable context-
awareness, incorporating various relevant contextual information (e.g., motion states of road users, weather, and road
conditions) and thus adapting to diverse scenarios from vehicle-vehicle encounters on highways to pedestrian-vehicle
interactions in urban streets. Furthermore, GSSM learns interaction patterns from naturalistic data, i.e., real-world
and unconstrained driving behaviour collected under everyday conditions with minimal interference, and does not
require any crash records or manually labelled risk. This makes the training of GSSM scalable. In summary, GSSM
offers a new paradigm for proactive collision risk quantification. It promises a contribution to advancing proactive
safety research, to improve, e.g., autonomous driving systems, infrastructure design and operations, as well as traffic
management policies.
In the rest of this paper, Section 2 first defines the problem of proactive collision risk quantification and then introduces
GSSM. Its learning is explained in Section 3. In Section 4, we present a real-world dataset of crashes and near-crashes
for validating GSSM. Our experiment design is described in Section 5, followed by Section 6 where the characteristics of
GSSM are demonstrated. Finally, Section 7 concludes this paper and envisions future research. To improve readability,
we place details that do not hinder understanding in appendices.
2
Generalised surrogate safety measure
In this section, we introduce the generalised surrogate safety measure (GSSM). We first formulate the general problem
of proactive collision risk quantification, and then outline the theoretical basis for GSSM. Our design of GSSM inherits
the fundamental knowledge developed over decades of research on surrogate safety measures (SSMs), where potential
collisions are also called traffic conflicts. This distinguishes GSSM from existing self-supervised (and unsupervised)
approaches, which are tailored for computer vision and primarily based on anomaly detection. Despite that, GSSM is
adequately flexible to incorporate vision context.
2.1
Problem formulation
Although the consequences of traffic accidents vary, this paper considers that every collision should be avoided and
thus focuses on the likelihood of potential collisions. Within this scope, we define the proactive risk quantification of
potential collisions as a function Q : S 7→L, where S represents a scenario of traffic interaction and Q(S) estimates
the likelihood L of an impending collision in this scenario. L is typically expressed as a probability p ∈(0, 1), or as a
numerical or categorical level M that can be monotonically mapped to p.
The primary objective of Q is to accurately and timely foresee a potential collision. Inaccurate and ill-timed anticipation,
e.g., road users acting too quickly or, on the contrary, failing to act, are the most common factors of road crashes
(as surveyed in [33], 51% of car drivers, 42% of motorcyclists, 68% of pedestrians, and 46% of cyclists). To alert
to a potential collision, L is usually converted into a binary outcome using a threshold. When annotated data of
(near-)crashes are available, assessing the accuracy of Q then compares these binary classification results with ground
truth annotations, while timeliness is assessed by the time between the threshold-based alerts and the occurrence of a
crash or near-crash event. In the absence of annotations, surrogates such as close distance and hard braking are used to
create near-crash labels (e.g., [34–36]).
3


[PAGE 4]
As reviewed in Section 1, Q can be predefined in closed-form expressions or based on uncertainty-aware prediction,
and can also be learnt in a supervised manner with annotated crash videos. A particular challenge in collision risk
quantification is that crash and near-crash data are expensive to collect and inherently rare, despite causing numerous
fatalities and injuries. Consequently, there is a growing interest in unsupervised and self-supervised learning approaches
that do not rely on annotated crash data, to name a few, see [37–40].
2.2
Operational definition
Every collision evolves, often rapidly, from a previously safe interaction. This evolution was first articulated by
Hydén [41] as the safety pyramid. In Figure 2 we depict the conceptual relations in the safety pyramid, which also
reflects the interaction behaviours of road users [42]. For two or more approaching road users, a potential collision
emerges when they are too close to safely interact. The perceived risk of a potential collision then triggers the road
users to take evasive actions. In case of successful evasion, the potential collision will end in a near-crash; otherwise, a
crash will occur.
Crashes
Near-crashes
Potential collisions
(Conflicts)
Interactions
Undisturbed passages
Unsuccessful 
or no evasion
Collision risk 
perception
Successful
evasion
Independent
driving
Interactive
driving
Spatial-temporal gap
Behaviour
Events
Approaching
Figure 2. The safety pyramid conceptualises the evolution from safe interactions to unsafe interactions up to crashes.
Building on the safety pyramid, GSSM considers the spatial-temporal gap between road users as a proxy that can
reflect collision risk across varying interaction contexts. Intuitively, a smaller gap implies less physical space and time
available to react and prevent a potential collision. Empirical evidence also shows that people perceive increased risk
when other moving objects approach [43, 44]; and motivated by the perceived risk, maintain acceptable separation from
each other [45]. In this paper, we let GSSM use the spatial gap, hereafter referred to as spacing. GSSM quantifies
collision risk by the extent to which a spacing is too close for safe interaction in its interaction context. To enable
cross-context risk quantification, we establish two key assumptions:
Assumption 1 Potential collisions are precursors to collisions as well as continuation of previously safe interactions.
Assumption 2 In the same interaction context, reduced spacing monotonically indicates increased risk of collision.
Formally, we consider repeated observations in the same interaction context and define the extent of proximity as the
number of times a given spacing is the minimum among all observed spacings. Following the problem formulation,
we factorise an interaction scenario S into (s, X), where s ≥0 is the spacing between two or more road users and X
denotes all other contextual observables, e.g., motion states, weather, lighting, and road surface conditions. Accordingly,
GSSM : (s, X) 7→M, where M is a risk level. For n ∈N>0 observations with varying spacings in context X, the
extreme value theory calculates p(s, n|X) = (Pr(S > s|X))n as the probability that s is the minimal spacing in n
repeated observations. The smaller s is, over the more observations s remains minimal, and the larger n is.
We interpret the extent of spacing proximity n as conflict intensity. Accordingly, p(s, n|X) can be understood as the
probability that an interaction scenario (s, X) is a conflict at intensity n. Then we define the critical intensity of an
interaction as the smallest n for which the probability of conflict exceeds the probability of no conflict, i.e., n satisfies
p(s, n|X) > 1 −p(s, n|X). Solving the inequality yields n > ln 0.5/ ln(Pr(S > s|X)), and we use this critical point
to define GSSM.
To summarise, GSSM is operationally defined as the critical conflict intensity ˆn of an interaction scenario (s, X). From
the view of extreme value theory, the spacing s has a probability of 0.5 to be the minimum in ˆn observations in the same
interaction context X; from a more intuitive view, if the interaction involves a conflict, its intensity is at least ˆn. The
value of ˆn may be very large, e.g., 1, 000 or 10, 000, in high-risk interactions. For convenience, we take the base-10
logarithm of ˆn, yielding representative scores of 3 and 4, respectively. Equation (1) presents the complete definition
of GSSM with the following properties. Let M be the risk level given by GSSM, M ∈R. When s is larger than the
4


[PAGE 5]
median spacing in context X, Pr(S > s|X) < 0.5 and M ≤0, which implies safety. In contrast, smaller s corresponds
to larger M and a higher risk of potential collision. Particularly, when s = 0, M is infinite and indicates a factual
collision. In addition, M can be naturally mapped to a probability p ∈(0, 1) by p(s, X, M) = Pr(S > s|X)10M .
GSSM(s, X) = log10

ln 0.5
ln(Pr(S > s|X))

(1)
In theory, GSSM can be reduced to any SSM that is based on the spatial-temporal gap between road users, by specifying
appropriate contextual observables. For example, Time-to-Collision (TTC) and deceleration rate to avoid collision
(DRAC) account for the relative speed between two vehicles following one another; Proportion of Stopping Distance
(PSD) considers the squared speed of a vehicle following another. For more details on such reduction and additional
theoretical derivation, please refer to our previous work [46].
2.3
Multi-directional spacing
Spacing serves as a risk proxy in GSSM and reflects the physical and psychological reaction margin to prevent a
potential collision. As mentioned in Section 1 and displayed in Figure 1(b), traffic collisions in urban traffic significantly
outnumber those on highways. Urban traffic involves multi-directional movements beyond longitudinal dynamics.
These not only include car-following and lane-changing, but also two-dimensional (2D) interactions such as path
crossing and conflict negotiation, especially at intersections.
We adapt the method developed in our previous work [47] to quantify multi-directional spacing in 2D interactions.
Consider two road users, i and j. A relative coordinate system is introduced with its origin at the position of i and the
y-axis oriented along the direction of the relative velocity vij = vi −vj. If i and j have identical velocities, the y-axis
is instead aligned with the heading direction of i, denoted by hi. We transform the position of j, given by (xj, yj), into
the relative coordinate system and get (xij, yij). Then the multi-directional spacing between i and j at each time step is
represented by (xij, yij, |vij|). This coordinate transformation is explicitly defined in equation (2).

xij
yij

=
1
p
x2
axis + y2
axis

yaxis
−xaxis
xaxis
yaxis

+

xj
yj

−

xi
yi

;
(xaxis, yaxis) =
(xvi −xvj, yvi −yvj),
if vi̸ = vj,
(xhi, yhi),
otherwise.
(2)
To facilitate subsequent model training, we convert the positional components (xij, yij) in multi-directional spacing
into polar coordinates. We define the polar coordinate system with its pole at the origin of the relative coordinate system
and its polar axis aligned with the x-axis of the relative coordinate system. This conversion yields (ρij, sij, |vij|) as the
polar representation of multi-directional spacing, where ρij is the angular coordinate and sij is the radial coordinate.
Respectively, ρij represents the direction of spacing and sij represents the distance of spacing. We then incorporate ρij
and relative speed |vij| in the context X, and use sij as the spacing variable s.
2.4
Parameterised GSSM
We now introduce a parametric form of GSSM. Notice that Pr(S > s|X) in equation (1) equals to 1 −Pr(S ≤s|X).
Consider the conditional distribution of spacing s in context X, Pr(S ≤s|X) is the cumulative probability distribution
of p(s|X). We thus parameterise Pr(S ≤s|X) by FS(s; ϕ(X)), where ϕ(X) denotes the conditional parameters
depending on X. To specify FS(s; ϕ(X)), we can learn ϕ(X) using standard statistical and machine-learning techniques,
thereby making GSSM more tractable for training.
Many studies demonstrate that the spatial gaps between road users are effectively characterised by the lognormal
distribution [48–50]. We thus assume the context-conditioned spacing distribution p(s|X) follows a lognormal
distribution with two parameters µ and σ. For numerical stability in training, we learn (µ, log(σ2)) instead of (µ, σ).
But considering the convenience of notation, we write the estimated parameters ˆϕ(X) = (ˆµ(X), ˆσ2(X)) in this paper.
Then equation (3) presents the corresponding probability density function, and a parameterised GSSM is defined in
equation (4), where erf(z) = 2
R z
0 e−x2dx/√π is the Gaussian error function within domain (−1, 1).
fS(s; ϕ(X)) =
1
s
p
2πˆσ2(X)
exp

−(ln s −ˆµ(X))2
2ˆσ2(X)

(3)
GSSM(s, X) = log10

ln 0.5
ln(1 −FS(s; ϕ(X))

= log10


ln 0.5
ln 1
2

1 −erf

ln s−ˆµ(X)
√
2ˆσ2(X)



(4)
5


[PAGE 6]
3
GSSM learning
For self-supervised risk quantification using GSSM, the primary learning task aims to estimate the conditional parameters
of context-conditioned spacing distributions. Notably, learning a GSSM does not require crash or near-crash data; it
leverages normal interactions, of which the available data is far more abundant. In addition to this primary task, we
introduce two auxiliary tasks. One is context representation learning to incorporate a wider range of data for training;
the other is feature attribution to identify contributing factors to potential collision risk.
3.1
Inference of conditional parameters
We use a neural network gW to estimate the conditional parameters ϕ(X), where W denotes the network’s learnable
weights. Therefore, gW (X) outputs parameter estimates ˆϕ(X) and it needs to make fS(s; ˆϕ(X)) approximate the spac-
ing distribution p(s|X) as closely as possible. A closer approximation can be indicated by a smaller Kullback–Leibler
divergence DKL [p(s|X)||fS(s; gW (X))]. Minimising this divergence is equivalent to maximising expected log-
likelihood Es∼p(s|X) [ln fS(s; gW (X))] given real-world observations of road user interaction. More conveniently,
we minimise the negative log-likelihood (NLL) loss defined in equation (5), where (si, Xi) represents a sample of
interaction scenario described by spacing si and contextual observables Xi. This guides gW (X) to accurately fit the
spacing distributions conditioned on various interaction contexts.
LNLL = −ln
N
Y
i=1
f(si; gW (Xi)) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
ℓNLL(si, Xi),
ℓNLL(si, Xi) = 1
2

ln 2π + ln ˆσ2(Xi) + (ln si −ˆµ(Xi))2
ˆσ2(Xi)

+ ln si
(5)
To avoid abrupt changes in risk quantification for continuous interactions, we introduce a smoothness regularisation
term that penalises sharp differences in the distribution approximations for similar interaction contexts. Specifically, for
each Xi, we generate a perturbed X′
i by adding a small Gaussian noise to each continuous variable in the original Xi.
As shown in equation (6), then a Jensen-Shannon divergence (DJS) between the estimated distributions in context X
and a similar context X′ is weighted by β = 5 and added to LNLL. Thereby, W = arg minW LSmoothNLL.
LSmoothNLL = 1
N
N
X
i=1
ℓSmoothNLL(si, Xi, X′
i, β),
ℓSmoothNLL(si, Xi, X′
i, β) = ℓNLL(si, Xi) + βDJS[fS(s; gW (Xi))||fS(s; gW (X′
i))]
(6)
3.2
Context representation learning
In this paper, we categorise the contextual observables X describing an interaction scenario into three feature groups.
Current features (denoted by XC) represent the instantaneous states of interacting road users, including, e.g., their
individual speeds and relative velocity. Environment features (XE) describe external conditions during the interaction,
such as weather, lighting, and road surface quality. Historical kinematic features (XT ) include time-series data of the
interacting road users’ speeds and yaw rates within the past 2.5 seconds. To avoid leakage of spacing information as
suggested in [46], random values in XT are dropped out (set as zero). A comprehensive list of these contextual features
is provided in Appendix Table A.1.
Each feature group is processed by a dedicated encoder, yielding encoded representation groups θC = gC
WC(XC),
θE = gE
WE(XE), and θT = gT
WT (XT ). These groups are then concatenated and passed to a decoder gD
WD, which
estimates conditional parameters as illustrated in Equation (7). Details of these modules’ architecture are provided in
Appendix Section A.3.
ϕ(X) = gD
WD([θC; θE; θT ])
(7)
The learning of encoded representation is implicitly achieved when training a gW (X) as a whole. In practice, the
encoders can also be pretrained by separate representation learning. For instance, contrastive learning is well aligned
with GSSM training, which essentially aims to capture spacing patterns in similar conditions and distinguish those
in dissimilar conditions. To focus on presenting GSSM, we do not perform separate representation learning in the
experiments in this paper, but future research is expected for more practical applications.
3.3
Attribution of feature importance
In order to improve traffic safety, the features that strongly influence the estimated risk of potential collisions are worth
identifying. GSSM learns interaction patterns from real-world data and varies its estimates of collision risk in different
6


[PAGE 7]
contexts. To analyse these learnt patterns and attribute each feature’s effect on the estimated risk, we use an explainable
artificial intelligence (XAI) method known as Expected Gradients (EG [51]).
EG extends Integrated Gradients [52] by taking the expectation of gradients over integration path steps α ∼U(0, 1)
and a set of reference points. For clearer interpretation, we compute attributions with respect to various pieces of latent
representation θ (rather than raw inputs). The reference points are typically sampled from a uniform distribution over
the entire training set [51]. Here, we apply k-means clustering to Θ, the representations encoded from all samples
in the training set, and use cluster centres as representative references θ′. Equation (8) summarises our computation
of EG. The computed attributions sum to the difference in estimated risk given θ relative to the averaged risk given
the references. The positive attribution of a feature means it contributes to increasing the estimated risk, whereas the
negative attribution implies a contribution to decreasing the risk. More details about the encoder design to ensure
correct dependence of contextual features are referred to Appendix Section A.3.
EG(θ) = Eθ′∼Θ,α∼U(0,1)
(
(θ −θ′) ∂
∂θ log10
"
ln 0.5
ln(1 −FS(s; gD
WD(θ′ + α(θ −θ′)))
#)
(8)
Note that these attributions do not establish causality. For example, a positive attribution of relative speed does not imply
that a lower relative speed would have reduced the risk. In a posteriori manner, EG explains the features’ computational
influence on the inference of a trained neural network. We recommend two strategies for interpretation. First, compare
the attributions of all features at a specific time moment to assess their relative importance. Second, track how the
attributions evolve over time. For instance, if the estimated collision risk rises along with an increasing attribution
for a particular feature, that feature may have a relatively strong correlation with collision risk. Nonetheless, such an
explanation alone cannot serve as evidence to justify an intervention, where future research is needed.
4
Data of potential collisions
Despite that GSSM does not use real-world traffic accidents for training purposes, a relatively small-scale dataset
of crashes and near-crashes is necessary for effectiveness assessment. Such a dataset needs to contain both safe and
safety-critical road user interactions in various situations. In Table 1, we summarise existing datasets that each have
over 500 crashes and/or near-crashes recorded.
Table 1. Existing datasets of crashes (and near-crashes).
Dataset a
Year b
Annotation c
Crashes (and near-crashes)
Number
Time range
Period before impact d
DAD [53]
2016
T
620
5 s
Designed to be 4.5 s
CADP [54]
2018
T, S
1,416 e
Varying
On average 3.7 s
A3D [37]
2019
T, P
1,500
Varying
Unrevealed
CCD [55]
2020
T, P, W
1,500
5 s
At least 3.0 s
DADA [56, 57]
2019, 2022
T, S, C, P, W, L, A
2,000
Varying
On average 5.2 s
DoTA [39]
2022
T, S, C, P
4,677
Varying
On average around 4.0 s
SHRP2 NDS [58, 59]
2010-2013
T, S, C, P, W, L, etc.
8,895 f
Varying
At least 20.0 s
Reconstructed SHRP2
This paper
T, S, C, P, W, L, etc.
6,664 g
Varying
On average 22.8 s
aData sources: DAD, A3D, CCD, and DoTA were compiled from dashcam recordings posted on YouTube. DADA was compiled
from dashcam recordings posted on YouTube, Youku, Bilibili, iQiyi, Tencent, etc. CADP was compiled from surveillance camera
recordings posted on YouTube.
bFor SHRP2 NDS, the listed years are actual data collection time. For the other datasets, the years are publication time, since
these sets were sourced from the Internet and have no determinate collection time.
cAnnotated information includes: event time (T), bounding box positions (S), crash type (C), participants (P), weather (W),
lighting (L), driver’s attention map (A). The datasets derived from SHRP2 NDS include additional information such as traffic density
and road surface quality.
dImpact means physical contact in crashes; for near-crashes, the moment of closest proximity.
eAmong these videos, 205 are annotated while the others are not.
fThese include 1,942 crashes and 6,953 near-crashes.
gThese include 1,402 crashes and 5,262 near-crashes.
We select the database derived from the Second Strategic Highway Research Program’s (SHRP2) Naturalistic Driving
Study (NDS), where we reconstruct bird’s eye view trajectories for easier use. The major shortcoming of the other
datasets is the lack of safe baselines to test false positives, except for DAD providing 1,130 clips sampled from source
videos. Another issue is that most of the datasets were originally designed for accident detection rather than risk
7


[PAGE 8]
quantification, thus the time periods before crashes are not well preserved for assessing risk evolution. In the rest of this
section, we first introduce SHRP2 NDS, then describe the trajectory reconstruction, and finally summarise the data we
use in the following experiments.
4.1
SHRP2 Naturalistic Driving Study
The SHRP2 NDS is a large-scale research initiative aimed at understanding driver behaviour and performance. From
2010 to 2013, it collected extensive data using instrumented vehicles in six states in the United States. More than 3,300
participant vehicles were equipped with data acquisition systems that recorded video footage, vehicle network data (e.g.,
speed, brake, and accelerator positions), and signals from additional sensors such as forward radar and accelerometers.
A significant strength of SHRP2 NDS is its comprehensive set of manually annotated traffic safety events, including
crashes and near-crashes that are collectively termed “safety-critical events”, along with “safe baselines” selected
through stratified random sampling. Table 2 outlines the operational definitions of these events as described in [60],
where further details of the SHRP2 NDS are also referred to.
Table 2. Operational definitions of traffic safety events in the SHRP2 NDS.
Event
Operational definition
Crash
“Any contact that the subject vehicle has with an object, either moving or fixed, at any
speed in which kinetic energy is measurably transferred or dissipated is considered a
crash. This also includes non-premeditated departures of the roadway where at least
one tire leaves the paved or intended travel surface of the road, as well as instances
where the subject vehicle strikes another vehicle, roadside barrier, pedestrian, cyclist,
animal, or object on or off the roadway.”
Near-crash
“Any circumstance that requires a rapid evasive manoeuvrer by the subject vehicle,
or any other vehicle, pedestrian, cyclist, or animal, to avoid a crash is considered a
near-crash. A rapid evasive manoeuvrer is defined as steering, braking, accelerating,
or any combination of control inputs.”
Safe baseline (Non-conflict)
“Normal driving behaviours and scenarios where the driver may react to situational
conditions and events, but the reaction is not evasive and the situation does not place
the subject or others at elevated risk.”
4.2
Trajectory reconstruction
The accessible motion data from the SHRP2 NDS does not contain positional information of the subject (participant)
vehicles to protect driver privacy. In addition, the other road users are detected by forward radars as surrounding objects
in a subject-centric moving coordinate system. To align these data with the mainstream bird’s-eye-view datasets, we
reconstruct the trajectories for both subject vehicles and surrounding objects using extended Kalman filters (EKFs).
First, we linearly interpolate all time-series signals to a uniform frequency of 0.1 seconds. Next, we reassign the
indices of surrounding objects when necessary. Due to detection limitations, an object may be temporarily lost and
re-detected later with a new index. If a newly detected object is within a specified distance threshold of a previously
tracked object, the new object is assigned the previous index. We define the distance threshold as the object’s position
displacement relative to the subject over 0.3 seconds, constrained to a minimum of 0.5 m and a maximum of 2.5 m.
Then we reconstruct trajectories for each event in two steps.
Step 1: subject vehicle’s trajectory reconstruction. We apply an EKF assuming constant yaw rate and acceleration.
The motion dynamics are updated according to equations (9) and (10), where (xi, yi) denotes the vehicle’s position, ψi
the heading angle relative to the x-axis, vi the longitudinal speed, ωi the yaw rate, ai the longitudinal acceleration, and
ϵ = 0.001 is a threshold to use longitudinal updates when near-zero yaw rates induce numerical instability. The update
interval ∆t = 0.1 seconds. We place the subject vehicle initially at (xi, yi) = (0, 0) with its heading ψi = 0 along
the x-axis, and set the initial states of speed, yaw rate, and acceleration from original data. The data of yaw rates and
accelerations were stably recorded, but speed measurements were not always consistent. We thus consider two orders
of time sequence depending on whether the earliest or latest 0.5-second speed states are missing. If the latest states are
missing, we let the EKF propagate forward from the earliest available measurement; if the earliest states are missing,
we let the EKF propagate backwards. When both earliest and latest speed states exist, we run two EKFs from both ends
and then select the reconstructed trajectory that deviates less in speed and yaw rate from the original sensor data.


xi
yi
ψi
vi
ωi
ai


t+∆t
=


xi
yi
ψi
vi
ωi
ai


t
+


∆xi
∆yi
ωi∆t
ai∆t
0
0


, where
(9)
8


[PAGE 9]
∆xi =





cos(ψi)(vi∆t + 1
2ai∆t2),
if |ωi| ≤ϵ,
viωi[sin(ψi + ωi∆t) −sin(ψi)] + ai[cos(ψi + ωi∆t) −cos(ψi)] + aiωi sin(ψi + ωi∆t)∆t
ω2
i
,
otherwise;
∆yi =





sin(ψi)(vi∆t + 1
2ai∆t2),
if |ωi| ≤ϵ,
viωi[cos(ψi) −cos(ψi + ωi∆t)] + ai[sin(ψi + ωi∆t) −sin(ψi)] −aiωi cos(ψi + ωi∆t)∆t
ω2
i
,
otherwise.
(10)
Step 2: surrounding objects’ trajectory reconstruction. We then reconstruct the trajectories of the surrounding
objects. This reconstruction has the forward field of view only, as only forward radar data are available. During an event,
the subject vehicle may detect multiple objects (e.g., vehicles, cyclists, pedestrians, or animals), of which the edge
nearest to the subject vehicle is detected. For each object, we first convert its local radar coordinates into the subject
vehicle’s reconstructed global coordinate system. Then we determine the object’s centroid based on its dimensions
and whether the detected edge corresponds to its front or rear, inferred from its heading direction. Since only relative
positions and speeds are available for these detected objects, we use an EKF under the assumption of constant heading
and speed. The update equations are given in equation (11).


xj
yj
ψj
vj


t+∆t
=


xj
yj
ψj
vj


t
+


cos(ψj)vj∆t
sin(ψj)vj∆t
ψj
vj


(11)
Due to limited access to the raw data of cameras and radars, from which the provided data in the SHRP2 NDS were
extracted, our reconstruction intends to preserve the first-hand information (i.e., the provided data) as much as possible.
Therefore, this study defines reconstruction errors as the deviations of reconstructed trajectories from the provided
signals in the SHRP2 NDS. We optimise the EKF parameters of uncertainties and motion ranges by minimising the root
mean squared reconstruction error in subject speed, subject yaw rate, subject acceleration, and object speed, as well as
the mean displacement error of objects. The distributions of eventual reconstruction errors are presented in Appendix
Figure A.1. Note that due to the absence of raw data, the very small errors we achieved do not indicate an accurate
capture of reality, but of the original measurement. On average, the standard deviation is smallest for safe baselines and
larger for near-crashes and crashes. But the difference is rather small, with 0.03-0.04 m/s in subject speed, 0.08-0.13
m/s2 in subject acceleration, and 0.02-0.06 m/s in object speed.
4.3
Data used in this paper
We use crashes and near-crashes derived from the SHRP2 NDS as our test set for GSSM demonstration. The safe
baselines are used as part of our training data. Therefore, this paper utilises all reconstructed event trajectories, alongside
additional information relevant to the safety-critical events.
Not all 8,895 events in the original dataset could be reconstructed due to missing values, sensor inaccuracies, and the
absence of ground-truth data. There are 6,664 events where the trajectories of both the subject vehicle and at least one
surrounding object are reconstructed. From these, we extract a useful test set by excluding invalid events that meet any
of the following criteria:
• no object is detected for more than 5 seconds (too short to observe risk evolution),
• the crash or near-crash is with an object behind the subject vehicle (given the lack of rearward radar data),
• the crash or near-crash involves a “shapeless” obstacle (e.g., roadside pavement).
Eventually, we obtain 4,875 safety-critical events in the test set. Figure 3(a) presents the numbers of originally recorded
events in the SHRP2 NDS, the subset with both subject and object trajectories reconstructed, and the final filtered
subset.
The distributions of event types are further displayed in Figure 3(b), where the difference is primarily a result of the fact
that rear-end events are more likely to be continuously detected by the forward radar. In Figures 3(c-e), we also show the
numbers and percentages of events in different environmental conditions. More than 80% of the events occurred without
adverse conditions, i.e., dry roads, not precipitation, and in daylight. However, considering that adverse conditions are
less common by nature, they still play a role in causing traffic accidents.
In addition to the reconstructed trajectories, we attach other information about the safety-critical events. To consider
a broader range of factors leading to potential collisions, the environmental conditions, including weather, lighting,
road surface, and traffic density, are incorporated. To evaluate whether and when a potential collision is successfully
detected, the annotations of time when an event starts and ends, when the driver reacts (if applicable), and when the
impact occurs (a physical contact for crashes or the closest proximity in near-crashes) are also included. Further, the
specific type (e.g., with a leading object, during crossing or turning) of an event is included to evaluate the detection
of potential collisions in different scenarios. Lastly, when necessary, each event’s narrative is referred to for further
9


[PAGE 10]
(a) Event counts
32509
Crashes
Near-crashes
Safe interactions
Number of events
Recorded
1942
6953
Reconstructed
1402
5262
3893
In test set
282
4593
Number of events in total
4875
6664
8895
Recorded
36.8%
17.2%
17.0%
13.3%
Reconstructed
38.0%
17.9%
16.4%
13.4%
In test set
51.2%
24.2%
13.6%
(b) Event types
Animal
Pedestrian/cyclist
Following
Shapeless obstacle
Parked
Merging
Oncoming
Unknown
Leading
Adjacent lane
Single
Crossing/turning
Dry
Wet Snowy
Icy
Gravel
     Unknown
No Adverse
Raining
Mist/Light Rain
Snowing
Rain&Fog
Snow/Sleet&Fog
Fog
Sleeting
(c) Weather and road surface conditions
0
1
2
5
7
9
11
15
16
210
224
248
4121
Number of events
81.3%
11.8%
2.3%
1.4%
3.2%
(d) Lighting conditions
Daylight
Darkness(lighted)
Darkness(not lighted)
Dawn
Dusk
7.4%
14.9%
47.9%
19.0%
7.7%
2.7%
0.4%
(e) Traffic conditions
LOS A1
LOS A2
LOS B
LOS C
LOS D
LOS E
LOS F +
Unknown
Figure 3. Statistics of original and processed events in the SHRP2 NDS. (a) Numbers of crashes, near-crashes, and safe baselines
that are recorded, reconstructed, and used in the test. (b) Distribution of event types that are recorded, reconstructed, and used in
the test. (c) Distribution of weather and road surface conditions in the test events. (d) Distribution of lighting conditions in the
test events. (e) Distribution of traffic conditions in the test events. LOS stands for level of service, details of which are referred to
Appendix Table A.1.
verification. These result in the largest to date trajectory dataset of traffic crashes and near-crashes. This dataset has
been made accessible in [61].
5
Experiments
We run all experiments with an NVIDIA A100 GPU (80GB RAM) as well as 5 to 50 Intel Xeon CPUs, depending
on whether parallel computation is helpful. To ensure fair comparison across settings and methods, we control the
following conditions: random seed, maximum training epochs, early stopping criteria, and evaluation sample sets.
Hyperparameter choices are listed in Appendix Table A.2. We do not conduct an ablation experiment for neural network
design, as our core focus in experiments is on validating the proposed GSSM.
5.1
Training datasets and experiment design
Our training data consist of 3 datasets collected in different countries, involving different interaction scenarios, and
with different equipment. These data significantly differ from the test set, and we deliberately exploit this difference to
demonstrate the generalisability of GSSM. In addition, the diversity of these data mimics the heterogeneity in real-world
traffic interactions.
The first dataset is composed of the safe baselines derived from SHRP2 NDS as described in Section 4. We term this set
as SafeBaseline, where the interactions were recorded both on highways and in urban traffic. Considering the detection
limitation of forward radar, the majority of SafeBaseline may be on straight roads. To compensate for that, we introduce
two more datasets. One is specifically focused on urban intersections. This dataset was collected in the U.S. in 2019 by
a fleet of automated vehicles [62]. We use the set of interactions between human road users extracted by [63], and term
this set as ArgoverseHV. From the other dataset known as highD, we extract lane-change interactions using the same
methods in our previous work [46]. This dataset was collected by drones on German highways in 2018, with a position
error typically less than 10 cm [64]. To make fair use, we draw approximately equal-sized (over 522 thousand) samples
for each dataset, where 80% are used for training and 20% for model validation to monitor training progress.
The experiments are designed as follows to demonstrate the effectiveness of GSSM and its useful characteristics targeted
in this research.
• Effectiveness. Effective risk quantification accurately identifies dangers and provides timely alerts to prevent
potential collisions. Therefore, we compare GSSM with other existing methods on the accuracy in alerting
10


[PAGE 11]
crashes and near-crashes as well as the timeliness of alerts. For comparability, the GSSM compared in this
experiment is trained using only current features (XC).
• Scalability. The training of GSSM and its effectiveness are expected to be scaled with increased interaction
patterns. We combine SafeBaseline with varying proportions (random sampling 10%–100%) of ArgoverseHV
or highD, train a series of GSSMs on the combined datasets, and then observe the variation in their effectiveness.
• Context-awareness. GSSM is capable of considering varying contextual information, and additional con-
textual features are expected to enhance risk quantification effectiveness. We train multiple GSSMs on
SafeBaseline, which uniquely provides environment data. In addition to current features (XC), these GSSMs
progressively incorporate more contextual information of subject acceleration (ai), environment features (XE),
and historical kinematic features (XT ).
• Generalisability. Our training of GSSM does not use any crashes or near-crashes as in the test set. Essentially,
the effectiveness of all the GSSMs trained in this study is generalised from normal interactions, which vary in
location and equipment during data collection. In addition to that, GSSM is designed to be generally applicable
across interaction scenarios. We compare the effectiveness of GSSM against other methods for different types
of safety-critical events, including rear-end scenarios, lateral interactions with other road users in adjacent
lanes, crossing and turning conflicts, merging situations, and a small number of incidents involving vulnerable
road users (e.g., pedestrians and cyclists).
• Risk attribution. Lastly, we evaluate the dominant contributing factors to the change in collision risk based
on feature attribution.
Table 3 summarises the 29 GSSMs that are trained across these experiments. These variations depend on the training
datasets (or their combinations) and the selected contextual observables.
Table 3. Overview of GSSMs trained in the experiments and compared with existing methods.
Acronym ab
Training dataset(s) c
Contextual
observables
Experiment(s)
involved in
d
Number of
parameters
Training time
per sample (s)
Inference time
per sample (s)
TTC2D
N/A
[XC]
E, G
N/A
N/A
6.21E-7
ACT
3.93E-6
TAdv
4.78E-6
EI
5.05E-4
S-C
SafeBaseline
S, C
773,286
4.43E-5
1.37E-5
h-C
highD
E, G
773,286
4.39E-5
1.07E-5
A-C
ArgoverseHV
G
773,286
4.40E-5
1.34E-5
SA-C
SafeBaseline ∪ArgoverseHV{10%,20%,··· ,100%}e
S
773,286
Not measured
Not measured
Sh-C
SafeBaseline ∪highD{10%,20%,··· ,100%}
S
773,286
SAh-C
SafeBaseline ∪10%ArgoverseHV ∪100%highD
S
773,286
4.53E-5
1.19E-5
S-Ca
SafeBaseline
[XC, ai]
C
775,336
5.04E-5
1.33E-5
S-CE
[XC, XE]
C
857,486
6.42E-5
1.78E-5
S-CaE
[XC, ai, XE]
C
859,536
6.62E-5
1.88E-5
S-CET
[XC, XE, XT ]
C, R, G
885,664
7.48E-5
2.21E-5
S-CaET
[XC, ai, XE, XT ]
C
887,714
7.50E-5
2.35E-5
aThe two-dimensional surrogate safety measures (2D SSMs) have abbreviations TTC2D for Two-dimensional Time-to-
Collision [65], TAdv for Time Advantage [42], ACT for Anticipated Collision Time [66], and EI for Emergency Index [67].
bAcronyms for GSSMs follow the format <Datasets>-<Contextual observables>. For example, “S-C” is trained on
SafeBaseline and uses current features XC
cThe dataset names are abbreviated as “S” = SafeBaseline, “A” = ArgoverseHV, “h” = highD. If multiple datasets are used (e.g.,
“SAh”), the GSSM is trained on their union.
dThe experiments are abbreviated as “E”=Effectiveness, “S”=Scalability, “C”=Context-awareness, “G”=Generalisability,
“R”=Risk attribution. A GSSM may be involved in multiple experiments.
eThe data combined in addition to SafeBaseline are randomly sampled for 10%-100% from the whole dataset.
Since we do not include video data yet as contextual information, the comparison in this paper’s experiments excludes
the self-supervised methods based on computer vision or anomaly detection. Instead, we compare with surrogate
safety measures (SSMs) tailored for two-dimensional (longitudinal and lateral) interactions as listed in Table 4. Their
estimations are all based on the instantaneous states of interacting road users, i.e., the current features XC. For efficient
large-scale evaluation, we implement TAdv, ACT, and TTC2D in a vectorised form, enabling parallel computation over
thousands of interaction pairs.
There also exist extensions that incorporate stochastic behaviour and/or extreme value theory (e.g., survival analysis),
such as [68–70]. We do not compare with these methods because their implementations require specific modelling
assumptions about uncertainty (for example, how to represent trajectory noise and behavioural variability), which makes
a fair and consistent comparison difficult within our current framework. Nevertheless, we refer interested readers to this
line of work as a complementary direction that combines SSMs and probabilistic modelling.
11


[PAGE 12]
Table 4. Two-dimensional Surrogate Safety Measures (2D SSMs) used as baseline methods.
Two-dimensional SSM
Year
Brief summary
Time Advantage (TAdv) [42]
2010
Expected time gap between two road users passing a common spatial
zone, assuming no behaviour change in the short future. This is also
known as predicted Post-Encroachment-Time (PET).
Anticipated Collision Time (ACT) [66]
2022
The shortest distance between two road users divided by their
closing-in rate, assuming a constant closing-in rate in the short
future.
Two-dimensional Time-to-Collision
(TTC2D) [65]
2023
Minimum of the longitudinal and lateral Time-to-Collision values,
assuming no behaviour change in the short future.
Emergency Index (EI) [67]
2025
Intensity of evasive action required to prevent a potential collision,
based on the change rate in overlapping path.
5.2
Ground truth of safety-critical events
The original SHRP2 NDS annotates the time moments of the start, impact, and end of each crash or near-crash. For
crashes, impact time means physical contact time; for near-crashes, impact time is when the road users were at the
closest proximity. The safety-critical events in the test set have at least 20 seconds before the impact time. This allows
for separating the danger period and safe period in each event. Then we can create positive ground truth (i.e., potential
collision) between the subject vehicle and a conflicting object in the danger period, and negative ground truth (i.e., safe
interactions) between the subject vehicle and other surrounding objects in the safe period. As illustrated in Figure 4, we
consider the danger period of an event from the start time, or 4.5 seconds before impact time if the annotated start time
is less than 4.5 seconds until impact. This danger period is considered to finish at the end time, or in 0.5 seconds after
impact time if the annotated end time is delayed. Meanwhile, we consider the safe period for each surrounding object
as 2 to 5 seconds after the object is detected for 1.5 seconds and 3 seconds before the event start time. To be considered
as in a safe period, the object should not have a hard braking (deceleration greater than 1.5 m/s2).
Start time Impact time
End time
An unselected
surrounding object
Another
surrounding object
A surrounding object
Subject vehicle
At least 4.5 s
1.5 s
3 s
1.5 s
5 s
Pre-danger period
In-danger period
Danger period
Safe period
Figure 4. Separation of time periods for each safety-critical event in the test set for evaluation.
The specific “conflicting object” in an event is not explicitly annotated in the SHRP2 data, and it’s possible the
conflicting object was not detected or recorded. We design a three-stage evaluation procedure to filter out those invalid
cases, create useful ground truth, and then perform a reliable evaluation.
• In the first stage, for each event, we use every method among the 2D SSMs and GSSMs (except for the ones
used to test scalability only) to evaluate the collision risk between the subject vehicle and each of all detected
surrounding objects, then determine a temporary conflicting object based on the evaluation. An event may
have zero or a few candidate objects evaluated by different methods.
• In the second stage, we let the methods vote for the most probable conflicting object. Considering that
each method votes for a candidate object, an abstention occurs when a method determines that no temporary
conflicting object exists. We select the object earning the most votes to be the eventual conflicting object. This
voted object should earn over 1/3 of the total votes, and have less than 1/3 of the total votes against.
• In the third stage, we apply the 2D SSMs and GSSMs to each event that has a voted conflicting object. True
and false positives are assessed based on the potential collision between the subject vehicle and the voted
conflicting object in the danger period. True and false negatives are assessed based on the safe interactions
between the subject vehicle and other surrounding objects in their safe periods.
12


[PAGE 13]
To determine a temporary conflicting object in the first stage, we assume that the conflicting object in an event is the
most risky object in the danger period, and its collision risk is less in the pre-danger period than in-danger period. More
specifically, the object with the highest average collision risk during in-danger period is first selected. If the selected
object has no data before the danger period, further confirmation is not possible, so we skip the event to be conservative
than misleading. If any data of this selected object is recorded before danger, the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the
risk quantification in the pre-danger period should be less than those in the danger period; otherwise, this object is not
the real conflicting object. Here we use the percentiles (rather than, e.g., minimum, mean, maximum) for a more robust
comparison and to avoid any potential influence of outliers.
5.3
Evaluation metrics
As mentioned in Section 2.1, the evaluation of proactive risk quantification includes two aspects of detection accuracy
and alert timeliness. The following subsections detail the metrics used in this paper.
5.3.1
Detection accuracy
Using a threshold, we convert the risk quantification of a potential collision into binary outcomes of “safe” or “unsafe”,
then use the unsafe outcomes to issue alerts. Depending on whether the alerts correctly warn of a crash or near-crash
and stay silent during safe interactions, each event has 4 possible counts. Targeting the conflicting object in the danger
period, a True Positive (TP) issues alerts for at least 0.5 seconds; a False Negative (FN) issues no alerts. For all qualified
objects other than the conflicting object in their safe periods, True negatives (TNs) issue no alerts; False positives
(FPs) incorrectly issue alerts. Then counting for all test events, equation (12) defines false negative rate RFN and false
positive rate RFP; equation (13) defines Precision, Recall, and a combined accuracy score F1.
RFN =
FN
TP + FN,
RFP =
FPs
FPs + TNs.
(12)
Precision =
TP
TP + FPs,
Recall =
TP
TP + FN,
F1 = 2Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall.
(13)
5.3.2
Alert timeliness
We define Time to Impact (TTI) to measure how early a potential collision is recognised relative to impact time (timpact),
the moment of physical contact in crashes or the moment of minimum proximity in near-crashes. As a posteriori
quantity, TTI counts from the last time moment when risk quantification shifts from safe to unsafe until a (near-)crash
in reality. This is formally defined in equation (14), where Mt is the estimated risk level of a potential collision at
time t, M ∗is a threshold to distinguish safety. We let M−1 ≤M ∗in case all recorded time moments are estimated as
unsafe. Without loss of generality, we assume that a larger M indicates a higher risk; the inequalities can be reversed if
a smaller M indicates higher risk.
TTI = timpact −max{t | Mt > M ∗, Mt−1 ≤M ∗, t ≤timpact}
(14)
For a collective evaluation over test events, we first use PTTI≥1.5, which indicates the percentage of events with
TTI ≥1.5 s among correctly detected (near-)crashes. The threshold of 1.5 s is motivated by empirical findings that
human drivers typically require 1 to 1.3 s to respond to an obstacle [71, 72]. As a second measure of alert timeliness,
we use median time-to-impact across all correctly detected (near-)crashes, denoted by mTTI. Based on the definition
in equation (14), TTI ≥0 and its maximal value depends on the time period recorded before impact. We thus restrain
TTI < 10 s when calculating mTTI. To reflect the variation of TTI, we report mTTI [Q1, Q3]; 99%CI, where Q1
and Q3 are the first and third quartiles, respectively, and 99%CI is the 99% confidence interval obtained via two-sided
sign test for mTTI. Similar to the accuracy metrics, mTTI and PTTI≥1.5 vary at different alerting thresholds.
5.3.3
Performance curves
Risk quantification must balance the trade-off between desired yet conflicting characteristics at different thresholds.
For example, a threshold resulting in smaller RFP necessarily increases RFN. Such a threshold also entails higher
Precision, but lower Recall. Likewise, earlier alerts (i.e., larger TTI) tend to be accompanied by more false positives
and less accurate detection. Therefore, our evaluation uses three key performance curves to compare different methods
on a common set of events in the test dataset. Each curve is obtained by varying the threshold that distinguishes risk
from safety. As summarised in Table 5. Receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) intuitively presents the trade-off
between false detection rates; Precision-recall curve (PRC) comprehensively evaluates accuracy performance; and
Accuracy-timeliness curve (ATC) evaluates timeliness performance under different accuracy levels.
If a perfect model exists, ROC and PRC have their theoretical optimal points of zero false and all correct detection.
ATC does not have a theoretical optimum, but we consider a practical optimal point to be the mTTI when F1 is the
highest, defined as mTTI∗= arg maxTTI F1. Accordingly, we denote the PTTI≥1.5 at this point P ∗
TTI≥1.5.
13


[PAGE 14]
Table 5. Performance curves of risk quantification at varying thresholds.
Performance curve
Horizontal axis
Vertical axis
Optimal point
Receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC)
RFP ∈[0, 1]
1 −RFN = RTP ∈[0, 1]
In theory, (0, 1)
Precision-recall curve (PRC)
Recall ∈[0, 1]
Precision ∈[0, 1]
In theory, (1, 1)
Accuracy-timeliness curve (ATC)
mTTI ∈[0, 10]
F1 ∈[0, 1]
(max F1, mTTI∗)
5.3.4
Safety-focused evaluation metrics
Based on the performance curves, we first use AUPRC, the area under PRC, as a comprehensive metric to assess
detection accuracy. Here we do not consider the area under ROC, as a method that has a better-performed PRC (i.e., of
larger AUPRC) necessarily has a larger area under ROC [73]. For timeliness evaluation, we use P ∗
TTI≥1.5 and mTTI∗
when F1 is at the highest point on ATC. The larger the values, the earlier the alerts under the optimal detection accuracy.
Risk alerting of potential collisions is different from normal binary classification problems, as false negatives can cause
significantly more severe consequences than false positives. To emphasise the high cost of false negatives, we define
two safety-focused metrics based on ROC and PRC, respectively. The first is AROC
R
as defined in equation (15), the
area under the ROC curve when 1 −RFN is larger than R (i.e., false negative rate is smaller than 1 −R). For easier
comparison, we normalise the area relative to its maximum possible value 1 −R. The second is PrecisionPRC
R
defined
in equation (16), the highest Precision on the PRC when Recall is larger than R. For both metrics, the larger the value,
the more accurate a model is, given a necessarily low false negative rate.
AROC
R
=
1
1 −R
Z 1
R
(1 −RFP(r)) dr, with r = 1 −RFN
(15)
PrecisionPRC
R
= max(Precision | Recall ≥R)
(16)
To offer an overview, we use AUPRC, AROC
80% , AROC
90% , PrecisionPRC
80% , and PrecisionPRC
90% to evaluate detection accuracy,
while P ∗
TTI≥1.5 and mTTI∗are used for timeliness evaluation. We select the restriction rate R to be 80% and 90%
to reinforce a focus on safety. Some methods, if they are not safe enough, can have zero area measured by AROC
80% or
AROC
90% , or are not applicable (N/A) when measured by PrecisionPRC
80% or PrecisionPRC
90% . For all of the metrics, higher
values indicate better performance in collision risk quantification.
6
Results
The risk quantification of safety-critical interactions by GSSM is generalised from normal traffic interactions. The
training of GSSM is on normal interaction data, of which the collection varies in locations and equipment. Then the
test set contains thousands of crashes and near-crashes where at least 20 seconds are recorded before a safety-critical
event happens, offering both positive and negative ground truth. In the experiment on Scalability, we use the first-
stage evaluation results of the 4,875 safety-critical events in the test set, and determine a proportion of 10% to add
ArgoverseHV data and 100% for highD (see Section 6.2 for the results), as already noted in Table 3. Then the settlement
of ground truth excludes GSSMs trained on other proportions of data combinations. Out of the 4,875 test events,
110 crashes and 2,481 near-crashes eventually have their conflicting objects determined. These 2,591 events form a
reliable evaluation basis for the other experiments on Effectiveness (Section 6.1), Context-awareness (Section 6.3),
Generalisability (Section 6.4), and Risk attribution (Section 6.5), where the third-stage evaluation results are presented.
In the reliable set, each of the 2,591 events has a danger period as a positive sample, and 3,777 safe periods with
different surrounding objects serve as negative samples. These events are considered distinct observations, and every
method is applied to a single event only once.
6.1
Effective risk quantification
We use Figure 5 and Table 6 to show the effectiveness of GSSM in detection accuracy and alert timeliness. Compared
with other existing two dimensional surrogate safety measures (2D SSMs), GSSM achieves superior accuracy in
detecting (near-)crashes, while maintaining relatively stable timeliness of alerts. As is shown by the ROC and PRC in
Figure 5, the curves of GSSM enclose the curves of all the other methods. This means an absolutely higher accuracy,
with fewer false positives and false negatives. Regarding alert timeliness, as is seen in Table 6, the percentage of
early alerts issued 1.5 s in advance and the median time to impact at optimal accuracy (i.e., P ∗
TTI≥1.5 and mTTI∗) of
GSSM are slightly lower than those of ACT and TTC2D. But GSSM exhibits a narrower interquartile range and 99%
confidence interval, indicating more stable performance across events. The accuracy-timeliness curves in Figure 5
also show that GSSM consistently secures a longer time for collision prevention than the other methods at the same
accuracy, as indicated by the F1 score, higher than 0.8.
14


[PAGE 15]
0
20
40
60
80
False positive rate (%)
20
40
60
80
100
True positive rate (%)
Receiver operating characteristic
curve (ROC)
40
60
80
100
Recall (%)
20
40
60
80
100
Precision (%)
Precision-recall curve
(PRC)
1
2
3
4
Median time to impact (s)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
F1 score
Accuracy-timeliness curve
(ATC)
Safety-critical
GSSM
ACT
TTC2D
TAdv
EI
Figure 5. Performance curves comparing GSSM and existing two-dimensional surrogate safety measures (2D SSMs). The
GSSM under comparison is h-C which is trained on the highD data and uses current features. For the other 2D SSMs, TAdv is
abbreviated for Time Advantage; ACT for Anticipated Collision Time; TTC2D for Two-dimensional Time-to-Collision; and EI for
Emergency Index. Each method is tested on the same 2,591 safety-critical events, including 2,481 near-crashes and 110 crashes. In
the ATC plot, the shaded bands represent 99% confidence intervals for median time to impact.
Table 6. Numeric performance evaluation of GSSM and existing methods. Each method is tested on the same 2,591 safety-critical
events, including 2,481 near-crashes and 110 crashes. The 99% confidence intervals (CI) of mTTI∗are obtained via two-sided sign
test. For all of the metrics, higher values indicate better performance. The best value in each column is underlined and marked bold;
the second-best value is marked bold.
Method
AUPRC
AROC
80%
AROC
90%
PrecisionPRC
80%
PrecisionPRC
90%
P ∗
TTI≥1.5
mTTI∗[Q1, Q3]; 99%CI
GSSM
0.900
0.817
0.729
0.887
0.814
0.819
2.60 [1.80, 3.51]; 2.53–2.65
ACT
0.824
0.721
0.561
0.850
0.795
0.769
2.78 [1.63, 3.91]; 2.70–2.88
TTC2D
0.818
0.493
0.139
0.865
0.674
0.860
2.83 [1.97, 3.83]; 2.75–2.90
TAdv
0.700
0.584
0.414
0.738
0.640
0.606
1.73 [0.99, 2.50]; 1.68–1.78
EI
0.842
0.426
0.251
0.706
0.539
0.747
2.26 [1.47, 3.20]; 2.20–2.34
6.2
Scalable GSSM training
Without requiring crashes or manual labels of near-crashes for training, GSSM leverages normal interactions, of which
the available data is far more abundant. This not only means GSSM learns interaction patterns, but also implies
effectiveness improvement by feeding more diverse patterns of traffic interactions. Figure 6 illustrates such scalability
of GSSM in accurately alerting potential collisions. The GSSMs being compared are all trained with instantaneous
states of road user movement. We use the GSSM trained on the SafeBaseline dataset as a benchmark, and increasingly
include more data from the crossing interactions in the ArgoverseHV dataset and lane-changes in the highD dataset.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Additional proportion (%)
0.6
0.7
0.8
Metric value
(a) Increasing crossings in ArgoverseHV
0
20
40
60
80
100
Additional proportion (%)
0.6
0.7
0.8
(b) Increasing lane changes in highD
A ROC
80%
A ROC
90%
PrecisionPRC
80%PrecisionPRC
90% AUPRC
0.6
0.7
0.8
(c) Evaluation on lateral interactions
S-C
SA-C
Sh-C
SAh-C
A ROC
80%
A ROC
90%
PrecisionPRC
80%
PrecisionPRC
90%
AUPRC
Figure 6. Variation in risk quantification accuracy of GSSMs trained on different combinations of interaction patterns. (a) Accuracy
changes when the training data of SafeBaseline are combined with different proportions of ArgoverseHV data, which majorly cover
crossing and turning interactions at urban intersections. The accuracy evaluations are performed for event types of Crossing/turning
and Pedestrian/cyclist. (b) Accuracy changes when the training data of SafeBaseline are combined with different proportions of
highD data, which majorly cover lane-change interactions. The accuracy evaluations are performed for event types of Adjacent lane
and Merging. (c) Accuracy evaluations with events involving lateral interactions. All the GSSMs being compared use current features.
The compared models include S-C that is trained on SafeBaseline only, SA-C that combines SafeBaseline and 10% ArgoverseHV,
Sh-C that combines SafeBaseline and 100% highD, and SAh-C that combines SafeBaseline, 10% ArgoverseHV, and 100% highD.
Figure 6(a) shows the variation in alerting accuracy as increasing interactions of crossing and turning in ArgoverseHV
are included; while Figure 6(b) shows a counterpart for gradually including lane-change interactions in highD. A clear
15


[PAGE 16]
and consistent improvement is seen when more lane changes in highD serve training. As the proportion of ArgoverseHV
data increases, however, the accuracy metrics are first enhanced and then drop. This is reasonable because crossing and
turning interactions account for around 13.6% in the test set (see Figure 3). While these interactions are increasingly
included, the training of GSSM gradually shifts its optimisation direction, which may undermine the patterns learnt
from the SafeBaseline data.
Based on Figure 6(a) and 6(b), we consider 10% as the best proportion to include additional data from ArgoverseHV
and 100% from highD. Then Figure 6(c) compares the enhancement of risk quantification accuracy by including more
training data in addition to SafeBaseline. It is clearly seen that, to different degrees, incorporating additional lateral
interaction data improves the detection accuracy of crashes and near-crashes involving lateral interactions. This implies
exciting future work to obtain more powerful GSSMs by training on larger-scale interaction data.
6.3
Context-aware GSSM
Collision risk is conditioned on interaction context. For example, a usually safe interaction may become unsafe if it is
raining. As another example, the same speed could be safe on highways while unsafe in urban traffic. Therefore, being
aware of the context where an interaction happens is important, and GSSM allows for that. Figure 7 compares all the
evaluation metrics of alerting accuracy and timeliness across GSSMs that consider different contextual information. In
each plot specific to a metric, we separate two groups of GSSMs. One group does not consider the acceleration of the
subject vehicle as a current feature, while the other group does. Within each group, we progressively include additional
features of environmental conditions and historical kinematics.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
AUPRC
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
A ROC
80%
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
A ROC
90%
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
PrecisionPRC
80%
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
PrecisionPRC
90%
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
P *
TTI
1.5
0
0.5
1.5
2.5
mTTI *
S-C
S-CE
S-CET
S-Ca
S-CaE
S-CaET
Upper and lower 99% confidence intervals (CI)
Figure 7. Accuracy and timeliness comparison of GSSMs that consider varying contextual information. These GSSMs are all trained
on SafeBaseline. S-C uses current features only; S-CE uses current and environment features; S-CET uses current, environment, and
historical kinematic features. The other three, i.e., S-Ca, S-CaE, and S-CaET, additionally consider the instantaneous acceleration of
the subject vehicle. The 99% confidence intervals (CI) of mTTI∗are obtained via two-sided sign test.
The GSSMs using only instantaneous motion kinematics serve as baselines for comparisons within each group.
Additionally using environmental conditions in general achieves better performance in terms of both detection accuracy
and alert timeliness. This improvement is further enhanced when historical kinematic features are also used. Interestingly,
including historical kinematics improves alert timeliness more significantly than detection accuracy. This suggests that
historical kinematics are important to be considered for earlier risk alerts.
Across groups, the GSSMs that exclude and include the subject vehicle’s instantaneous acceleration are contrasted. As
is seen in Figure 7, including acceleration does not make improvements, except for AUPRC when historical kinematics
are considered. This implies that the acceleration provides little additional benefit, probably because it is redundant
with the historical kinematics, and is also affected by measurement noise and smoothing during trajectory processing.
6.4
One GSSM for all interactions
Driven by naturalistic data, GSSM is expected to learn interaction patterns across scenarios and effectively alert to
potential collisions in different types of interactions. The crashes and near-crashes we processed from SHRP2 NDS are
distributed in various types of events, as previously shown in Figure 3. Accordingly, we compare the performance of
GSSM and other 2D SSMs in these different safety-critical events. For better readability, we provide Table 7 showing
evaluation metrics, while Appendix Figure A.2 presents the performance curves. Table 7 clearly shows that GSSM is
significantly more effective in safety-focused detection accuracy across all interaction scenarios. This is particularly
prominent for the conflicts beyond rear-end. Although the timeliness of GSSM is not always the best, it secures at least
1.88 seconds to prevent potential collisions in more than 75% cases.
An interesting observation from Table 7 is the superior performance of GSSM in rear-end and merging interactions.
These two scenarios of interaction seem to be less challenging than other lateral interactions such as crossing and
turning. Based on the performance, the most challenging scenarios are interactions with pedestrians, cyclists, and
16


[PAGE 17]
Table 7. Comparison of detection accuracy and alert timeliness in separate types of safety-critical events. The GSSM under
comparison is trained on the SafeBaseline dataset and uses contextual information of instantaneous motion kinematics, environmental
conditions, and historical kinematics in the past 2.5 seconds. The 99% confidence intervals (CI) of mTTI∗are obtained via two-sided
sign test. For each type of event, the best value in each column is underlined and marked bold; the second-best value is marked bold.
Event
Number
of events
Method
AUPRC
AROC
80%
AROC
90%
PrecisionPRC
80%
PrecisionPRC
90%
P ∗
TTI≥1.5
mTTI∗[Q1, Q3]; 99%CI
Rear-end
1787
GSSM
0.858
0.926
0.887
0.952
0.930
0.877
2.53 [1.92, 3.45]; 2.45–2.58
ACT
0.869
0.852
0.786
0.881
0.877
0.719
2.28 [1.30, 3.09]; 2.19–2.34
TTC2D
0.869
0.702
0.452
0.932
0.906
0.856
2.49 [1.85, 3.26]; 2.43–2.56
TAdv
0.726
0.734
0.636
0.798
0.749
0.486
1.44 [0.76, 2.04]; 1.39–1.50
EI
0.911
0.745
0.562
0.930
0.812
0.730
2.10 [1.45, 2.88]; 2.02–2.16
Adjacent lane
611
GSSM
0.771
0.693
0.608
0.702
0.658
0.826
3.38 [1.88, 5.15]; 3.19–3.61
ACT
0.685
0.532
0.334
0.683
0.608
0.896
4.67 [2.88, 6.14]; 4.40–4.94
TTC2D
0.698
0.317
0.000
0.632
N/A
0.848
3.68 [2.06, 5.38]; 3.36–3.85
TAdv
0.588
0.381
0.271
0.512
0.475
0.751
2.38 [1.45, 3.34]; 2.19–2.51
EI
0.636
0.220
0.042
0.451
0.451
0.851
3.48 [1.93, 5.50]; 3.33–3.74
Crossing/turning
93
GSSM
0.747
0.599
0.530
0.755
0.729
0.967
4.85 [3.63, 6.38]; 4.21–5.46
ACT
0.735
0.350
0.017
0.792
0.677
0.933
5.16 [3.48, 6.46]; 4.62–5.40
TTC2D
0.678
0.000
0.000
N/A
N/A
0.950
4.77 [3.21, 6.33]; 4.32–5.31
TAdv
0.714
0.366
0.182
0.731
0.649
0.820
2.90 [2.04, 4.07]; 2.39–3.29
EI
0.694
0.000
0.000
N/A
N/A
0.934
4.13 [2.66, 5.71]; 3.30–4.70
Merging
29
GSSM
0.865
0.795
0.719
0.828
0.771
0.889
5.11 [3.23, 7.30]; 3.58–5.60
ACT
0.705
0.520
0.225
0.758
0.659
1.000
5.17 [3.75, 6.80]; 4.52–6.49
TTC2D
0.786
0.000
0.000
N/A
N/A
0.857
3.83 [2.17, 4.85]; 2.66–4.23
TAdv
0.678
0.251
0.000
0.522
N/A
0.727
2.71 [1.32, 3.87]; 1.52–3.39
EI
0.777
0.286
0.000
0.553
N/A
0.897
3.21 [2.12, 4.85]; 2.52–4.43
With pedestrian/
cyclist/animal
31
GSSM
0.851
0.379
0.313
0.800
0.800
1.000
5.94 [4.89, 7.16]; 4.89–7.16
ACT
0.706
0.066
0.000
0.758
N/A
0.966
5.38 [3.90, 6.54]; 4.20–6.09
TTC2D
0.697
0.000
0.000
N/A
N/A
0.897
4.51 [2.31, 5.57]; 2.82–5.14
TAdv
0.705
0.090
0.005
0.714
0.700
0.806
3.19 [1.76, 5.34]; 2.39–4.62
EI
0.733
0.000
0.000
N/A
N/A
0.867
3.78 [2.48, 5.55]; 2.55–5.36
animals. This could be because of the less predictable behaviour of these active and flexible road users, but also could
be because the interaction patterns with them are very limitedly covered in the training data used in this paper.
6.5
Attribution of collision risk
Figure 8 presents the top-ranked factors in different situations when GSSM evaluates an interaction to be safe or not,
which are respectively considered in safe periods and danger periods as defined in Figure 4. At each time moment in a
considered period, we calculate the attributions of all features, compare the positive attributions if the considered period
is safe or negative attributions otherwise, and record the 3 factors with the highest attributions. Then the ranking of the
most contributing factors is obtained after comparing the features at all time moments. Note that because our feature
attribution is performed based on the encoded representation rather than raw numbers of variables, the summarised
attributions indicate relative importance without implying whether an increasing or decreasing value is associated with
the quantified risk.
Focusing on what leads to potential collisions in lateral interactions, the left half of Figure 8(a) shows that spacing
direction, i.e., the angular coordinate of multi-direction spacing as defined in Section 2.3, contributes the most to
dangers in the adjacent lane, while the historical kinematics in the past 1.5 seconds contribute the most to dangers during
crossing and turning. Spacing direction is related to relative heading and the surrounding object’s lateral speed, which
are also ranked high. With not much surprise, relative speed also contributes considerably to potential collision. In
contrast, the right half of Figure 8(a) shows factors contributing to safe interactions. Relative speed and the surrounding
object’s lateral speed are the most contributing ones. In addition to them, relatively longer historical kinematics are
important. These results suggest that relative direction and speed are the main factors for accurate risk quantification.
Notably, a short movement history of approximately 1.5 seconds is more influential in detecting danger, whereas a
longer history of around 2.5 seconds provides greater context for perceiving safety in lateral interactions.
Adverse environments such as precipitation, wet road surfaces, driving at night, or unstable traffic flow are relatively
infrequent conditions, but may significantly increase the risk of collisions. In Figure 8(b), we present the factors
contributing to dangers in different adverse environments. The top factors harming safety overlap with rain and when
the road surface is wet. In both conditions, spacing direction and road surface are ranked as the most important. This
implies that the collision risk in such situations is highly influenced by the directional control of the involved road users.
Spacing direction remains highly ranked when considering interactions in the dark as well as in unstable traffic flow.
The other factors in these two adverse environments resemble those in general interactions in Figure 8(a). Interestingly,
the widths of interacting road users, i.e., half of the sum of the vehicle widths, play a role in collision risk when the
traffic flow is unstable. This could be due to relatively restrained road space for safe interactions.
17


[PAGE 18]
(a) Top factors in leading to and avoiding lateral conflicts
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Relative speed
Squared surrounding object's speed
Relative heading
Widths of interacting road users
Surrounding object's lateral speed
Spacing direction
Danger in adjacent lane
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Spacing direction
Kinematics in the passed 2.5 s
Kinematics in the passed 0.5 s
Squared relative speed
Surrounding object's lateral speed
Relative speed
Safe in adjacent lane
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Frequency of being top 3 factors
Kinematics in the passed 2.0 s
Relative speed
Spacing direction
Kinematics in the passed 1.5 s
Kinematics in the passed 1.0 s
Kinematics in the passed 0.5 s
Danger during crossing/turning
0.0
0.1
0.2
Frequency of being top 3 factors
Kinematics in the passed 0.5 s
Kinematics in the passed 1.0 s
Squared relative speed
Surrounding object's lateral speed
Relative speed
Kinematics in the passed 2.5 s
Safe during crossing/turning
(b) Top factors in conflicts in adverse environments
0.0
0.1
0.2
Relative speed
Weather
Kinematics in the passed 1.0 s
Kinematics in the passed 0.5 s
Road surface
Spacing direction
Raining weather
0.0
0.1
0.2
Surrounding object's lateral speed
Relative speed
Kinematics in the passed 1.0 s
Kinematics in the passed 0.5 s
Spacing direction
Road surface
Not dry road
0.0
0.1
0.2
Frequency of being top 3 factors
Relative heading
Surrounding object's lateral speed
Kinematics in the passed 1.0 s
Relative speed
Kinematics in the passed 0.5 s
Spacing direction
Not in daylight
0.0
0.1
0.2
Frequency of being top 3 factors
Relative speed
Widths of interacting road users
Surrounding object's lateral speed
Kinematics in the passed 1.0 s
Kinematics in the passed 0.5 s
Spacing direction
Unstable traffic flow
Figure 8. Top-ranked factors in risk quantification by GSSM. The GSSM used for feature attribution is S-CET, which is trained on
SafeBaseline and uses current, environment, and historical kinematic features. The threshold used to distinguish danger and safety is
2.52, which is optimised to achieve the highest Precision for Recall ≥0.85. This threshold means an interaction is considered
unsafe if its spacing remains minimal for at least 102.52 ≈331 times of observations in the same interaction context. (a) Top-ranked
factors in leading to and avoiding lateral crashes and near-crashes. (b) Top-ranked factors in crashes and near-crashes happened in
adverse environments.
7
Conclusion and discussion
We present the generalised surrogate safety measure (GSSM) to proactively quantify the risk of potential traffic collisions
before they happen. GSSM intends to address the challenges of scalability, context-awareness, and generalisability,
faced by existing approaches to proactive collision risk quantification. Below, we discuss the main findings.
• Instead of relying on historical records of crashes or near-crashes, GSSM stably learns from the patterns of
normal interactions and extrapolates them to safety-critical situations. This allows for scalable improvement
with increasing amounts of data, as are being collected by automated vehicles, and our results show enhanced
accuracy in risk quantification by additional lateral interaction patterns.
• The fundamental assumption made by GSSM is that collision risk emerges if interactions become extreme,
which is measured by the spacing between road users involved in a specific interaction context. GSSM utilises
neural networks to approximate such context-conditioned distributions of multi-directional spacing and is
data-driven. Its risk quantification is thus context-aware by incorporating any potentially helpful information
as inputs, e.g., instantaneous motion states, weather, road surface condition, lighting, and historical kinematics,
as we have illustrated.
• Our results also demonstrate that GSSM is highly generalisable. It achieves superior accuracy and timeliness
in alerting potential collisions across various interaction scenarios such as rear-end, merging, crossing, turning,
etc. Impressively but reasonably, GSSM also generalises well from training data to unseen test data, even
when the training data are collected in different countries and by different equipment. This implies that the
interaction patterns in urgent conditions, such as crashes and near-crashes, are shared in human behaviour.
• The attribution of collision risk shows that GSSM correctly utilises the information of weather and road surface
conditions when it is rainy or when the road is not dry. Importantly, spacing direction has a dominant influence
in lateral interactions, where short motion histories of around 1.5 seconds help recognise risk and longer
motion histories of 2.5 seconds are more useful to confirm safety. These findings emphasise the necessity for
context-aware collision risk quantification to consider diverse factors.
GSSM is limited by our modelling choices and requires further development and targeted validation in the future.
First of all, this study focuses on the probability of potential collisions while omitting to consider collision severity or
time of occurrence, which are important aspects of collision risk. Driven by real-world data, GSSM’s robustness to
sensor noise, missing values, and small perturbations in the input is not guaranteed, yet our training does not provide
formal guarantees or certified bounds. The datasets used in this research are carefully processed. To verify GSSM’s
stability and transferability, especially when extrapolating to extreme behaviours, a larger variety of interaction data
with multi-source noise and from more different driving cultures will be essential. In addition, richer modalities such
as vision and language can be incorporated to characterise more informative contexts. This motivates representation
learning to encode complex context and enable large-scale training in industrial applications. To truly improve traffic
safety, it is also important to investigate not only correlations but also causal mechanisms between contextual features
and the estimated risk. We regard GSSM as a starting point toward foundation models for proactive risk quantification
18


[PAGE 19]
of potential collisions. Before achieving that goal, more real-world training and verification are required to confirm its
stable effectiveness, quantifiable scalability, explainable context-awareness, and controllable generalisability.
The implications of such a methodology are broad for both ex ante prevention and ex post analysis of traffic collision
risk. The most direct benefit is for autonomous driving systems (ADS), given that GSSM can compute for a thousand
interactions per query within 25 milliseconds. Online, GSSM can provide a time-varying risk signal that serves as a
safety cost or constraint in motion planning, or as a safety “shield” that warns of potentially unsafe behaviours before
they are executed. Offline, it can be used to train and validate ADS in safety-critical situations, e.g., by filtering valuable
training materials, generating or ranking validation scenarios at varying levels of collision risk, and supporting closed-
loop testing in which high-risk interactions are selectively evaluated. Beyond ADS, GSSM enables civil engineering
and traffic management use cases: it allows for proactive evaluation and thus data-driven improvement in the safety
of road designs, operations, and policies. For example, GSSM can help traffic engineers and policy makers detect
emerging hazards in road networks and mitigate potential accidents before they occur. Altogether, these applications
contribute to a significant step toward the long-term vision of zero traffic fatalities, via a tool that quantifies and manages
risk proactively, in any context, at any time.
Data availability
The raw data are sourced from two subsets of the SHRP2 Naturalistic Driving Study: “A Study on the Factors That
Affect the Occurrence of Crashes and Near-Crashes” [58] and “Research of Driver Assistant System” [59]. They can be
accessed following the instructions at https://github.com/Yiru-Jiao/GSSM. All resulting data in this study are openly
accessible via 4TU.ResearchData at https://doi.org/10.4121/9caa1e6c-9abd-4e36-ae28-c9ea4542d940 [74].
Code availability
The code for this research is open-sourced at https://github.com/Yiru-Jiao/GSSM. A permanent record of the code
repository by this publication is managed by Zenodo at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17099863 [75].
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the TU Delft AI Labs programme. The authors acknowledge the use of computational
resources of the DelftBlue supercomputer, provided by Delft High Performance Computing Centre (https://www.
tudelft.nl/dhpc).
We extend our sincere gratitude to the researchers and organisations who collected, created, cleaned, and curated the
high-quality datasets for research use. We thank Dr. Guopeng Li for his knowledge in neural network training.
The raw data were accessed under SHRP2 Data Use License SHRP2-DUL-A-5-24-746, issued by the Virginia Tech
Transportation Institute (VTTI). The findings and conclusions presented here are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of VTTI, the Transportation Research Board, the National Academies, or the Federal
Highway Administration.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work, the authors used ChatGPT and DeepSeek in order to obtain suggestions for
readability improvement. No sentence was entirely generated by the generative tools. After using the tools, the authors
have reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.
References
[1]
Safety and Mobility (SAM) and Social Determinants of Health (SDH). Global status report on road safety 2023.
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2023.
[2]
Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Policies on spatial distribution and urbanization have broad
impacts on sustainable development. Tech. rep. 2020/2. New York: United Nations, 2020.
[3]
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME). Global Burden of Disease Study 2021 (GBD 2021) Results.
Tech. rep. Seattle, WA: IHME, 2022. URL: https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results/.
[4]
U. N. E. C. for Europe (UNECE). Road traffic fatalities, injuries and accidents involving injury by location.
URL: https://w3.unece.org/PXWeb2015/pxweb/en/STAT/STAT__40-TRTRANS__01-TRACCIDENTS/
02_en_TRAcclocation_r.px/ (visited on 03/22/2025).
19


[PAGE 20]
[5]
H. Saul, M. Junghans, M. Dotzauer, and K. Gimm. “Online risk estimation of critical and non-critical interactions
between right-turning motorists and crossing cyclists by a decision tree”. In: Accident Analysis & Prevention
163 (2021), p. 106449. DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2021.106449.
[6]
E. Papadimitriou, A. Filtness, A. Theofilatos, A. Ziakopoulos, C. Quigley, and G. Yannis. “Review and ranking
of crash risk factors related to the road infrastructure”. In: Accident Analysis & Prevention 125 (2019), pp. 85–97.
DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2019.01.002.
[7]
M. D. Jakobsen, K. Glies Vincents Seeberg, M. Møller, P. Kines, P. Jørgensen, L. Malchow-Møller, A. B.
Andersen, and L. L. Andersen. “Influence of occupational risk factors for road traffic crashes among professional
drivers: systematic review”. In: Transport Reviews 43.3 (2022), pp. 533–563. DOI: 10.1080/01441647.2022.
2132314.
[8]
W. J. Horrey, M. F. Lesch, M. J. Dainoff, M. M. Robertson, and Y. I. Noy. “On-Board Safety Monitoring Systems
for Driving: Review, Knowledge Gaps, and Framework”. In: Journal of Safety Research 43.1 (2012), pp. 49–58.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jsr.2011.11.004.
[9]
A. Chang, N. Saunier, and A. Laureshyn. PROACTIVE METHODS FOR ROAD SAFETY ANALYSIS. Tech. rep.
SAE, 2017. DOI: 10.4271/wp-0005.
[10]
A. Arun, M. M. Haque, S. Washington, T. Sayed, and F. Mannering. “A systematic review of traffic conflict-based
safety measures with a focus on application context”. In: Analytic Methods in Accident Research 32 (2021),
p. 100185. DOI: 10.1016/j.amar.2021.100185.
[11]
C. Wang, Y. Xie, H. Huang, and P. Liu. “A review of surrogate safety measures and their applications in
connected and automated vehicles safety modeling”. In: Accident Analysis and Prevention 157 (2021), p. 106157.
DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2021.106157.
[12]
L. Westhofen, C. Neurohr, T. Koopmann, M. Butz, B. Schütt, F. Utesch, B. Neurohr, C. Gutenkunst, and E. Böde.
“Criticality metrics for automated driving: A review and suitability analysis of the state of the art”. In: Archives
of Computational Methods in Engineering 30.1 (2022), pp. 1–35. DOI: 10.1007/s11831-022-09788-7.
[13]
P. Cooper. “Reports from group discussions”. In: Proceedings of the first workshop on traffic conflicts. Oslo,
Norway, Sept. 1977.
[14]
J. C. Hayward. “Near miss determination through use of a scale of danger”. In: 51st Annual Meeting of the
Highway Research Board 384 (1972), pp. 24–34.
[15]
D. F. Cooper and N. Ferguson. “Traffic studies at T-junctions – A conflict simulation record”. In: Traffic
Engineering and Control 17 (7 1976), pp. 306–309.
[16]
J. Wang, J. Wu, and Y. Li. “The Driving Safety Field Based on Driver–Vehicle–Road Interactions”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 16.4 (2015), pp. 2203–2214. DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2015.
2401837.
[17]
F. A. Mullakkal-Babu, M. Wang, X. He, B. van Arem, and R. Happee. “Probabilistic field approach for motorway
driving risk assessment”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 118 (2020), p. 102716.
DOI: 10.1016/j.trc.2020.102716.
[18]
S. Kolekar, J. de Winter, and D. Abbink. “Human-like driving behaviour emerges from a risk-based driver
model”. In: Nature Communications 11.1 (2020), p. 4850. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-18353-4.
[19]
E. Papadimitriou. Road safety thematic report – Main factors causing fatal crashes. Tech. rep. Brussels:
Directorate General for Transport, European Commission, 2024.
[20]
A. K. Dey. “Understanding and using context”. In: Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 5.1 (2001), pp. 4–7.
DOI: 10.1007/s007790170019.
[21]
S. Lefèvre, D. Vasquez, and C. Laugier. “A survey on motion prediction and risk assessment for intelligent
vehicles”. In: ROBOMECH Journal 1.1 (2014). DOI: 10.1186/s40648-014-0001-z.
[22]
J. Dahl, G. R. de Campos, C. Olsson, and J. Fredriksson. “Collision Avoidance: A Literature Review on
Threat-Assessment Techniques”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles 4.1 (2019), pp. 101–113. DOI:
10.1109/TIV.2018.2886682.
[23]
M. Althoff and J. M. Dolan. “Online Verification of Automated Road Vehicles Using Reachability Analysis”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Robotics 30.4 (2014), pp. 903–918. DOI: 10.1109/TRO.2014.2312453.
[24]
J. Kim and D. Kum. “Collision Risk Assessment Algorithm via Lane-Based Probabilistic Motion Prediction of
Surrounding Vehicles”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 19.9 (2018), pp. 2965–2976.
DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2017.2768318.
20


[PAGE 21]
[25]
F. B. Mathiesen, L. Romao, S. C. Calvert, L. Laurenti, and A. Abate. “A data-driven approach for safety
quantification of non-linear stochastic systems with unknown additive noise distribution”. In: arXiv (2024),
preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06662.
[26]
R. McAllister, Y. Gal, A. Kendall, M. Van Der Wilk, A. Shah, R. Cipolla, and A. Weller. “Concrete problems for
autonomous vehicle safety: advantages of Bayesian deep learning”. In: Proceedings of the 26th International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Melbourne, Australia, 2017, pp. 4745–4753.
[27]
D. Li, B. Liu, Z. Huang, Q. Hao, D. Zhao, and B. Tian. “Safe Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles
by Quantifying Uncertainties of Deep Learning-Enabled Environment Perception”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Vehicles 9.1 (2024), pp. 2318–2332. DOI: 10.1109/TIV.2023.3297735.
[28]
H. Kataoka, T. Suzuki, S. Oikawa, Y. Matsui, and Y. Satoh. “Drive Video Analysis for the Detection of Traffic
Near-Miss Incidents”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2018,
pp. 3421–3428. DOI: 10.1109/ICRA.2018.8460812.
[29]
J. Fang, J. Qiao, J. Xue, and Z. Li. “Vision-Based Traffic Accident Detection and Anticipation: A Survey”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 34.4 (2024), pp. 1983–1999. DOI: 10.1109/
TCSVT.2023.3307655.
[30]
P. Patera, Y.-T. Chen, and W.-H. Fang. “A Multi-modal Architecture with Spatio-Temporal-Text Adaptation for
Video-based Traffic Accident Anticipation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology
(2025). DOI: 10.1109/tcsvt.2025.3552895.
[31]
Y. Kumamoto, K. Ohtani, D. Suzuki, M. Yamataka, and K. Takeda. “AAT-DA: Accident Anticipation Transformer
with Driver Attention”. In: Proceedings of the Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)
Workshops. Feb. 2025, pp. 1142–1151.
[32]
H. X. Liu and S. Feng. “Curse of rarity for autonomous vehicles”. In: Nature Communications 15.1 (2024),
p. 4808. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-49194-0.
[33]
P. Thomas, A. Morris, R. Talbot, and H. Fagerlind. “Identifying the causes of road crashes in Europe”. In: AAAM
57th Annual Conference. Vol. 57. Quebec City, 2013.
[34]
J. Wang, Y. Zheng, X. Li, C. Yu, K. Kodaka, and K. Li. “Driving risk assessment using near-crash database
through data mining of tree-based model”. In: Accident Analysis & Prevention 84 (2015), pp. 54–64. DOI:
10.1016/j.aap.2015.07.007.
[35]
R. Nahata, D. Omeiza, R. Howard, and L. Kunze. “Assessing and Explaining Collision Risk in Dynamic
Environments for Autonomous Driving Safety”. In: 2021 IEEE International Intelligent Transportation Systems
Conference (ITSC). 2021, pp. 223–230. DOI: 10.1109/ITSC48978.2021.9564966.
[36]
J. Chen, Q. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Wang, Z. Fang, Y. Liu, and G. Yin. “A Driving Risk Assessment Framework Con-
sidering Driver’s Fatigue State and Distraction Behavior”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems 25.12 (2024), pp. 20120–20136. DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2024.3446832.
[37]
Y. Yao, M. Xu, Y. Wang, D. J. Crandall, and E. M. Atkins. “Unsupervised Traffic Accident Detection in First-
Person Videos”. In: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). 2019. DOI:
10.1109/IROS40897.2019.8967556.
[38]
J. Fang, J. Qiao, J. Bai, H. Yu, and J. Xue. “Traffic Accident Detection via Self-Supervised Consistency Learning
in Driving Scenarios”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23.7 (2022), pp. 9601–9614.
DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2022.3157254.
[39]
Y. Yao, X. Wang, M. Xu, Z. Pu, Y. Wang, E. Atkins, and D. Crandall. “DoTA: Unsupervised detection of traffic
anomaly in driving videos”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence (2022). DOI:
10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3150763.
[40]
C. Li, Y. Qian, C. Sun, W. Yan, C. Wang, and M. Yang. “TTC4MCP: Monocular Collision Prediction Based
on Self-Supervised TTC Estimation”. In: 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). 2023, pp. 244–250. DOI: 10.1109/IROS55552.2023.10341966.
[41]
C. Hydén. “The development of a method for traffic safety evaluation: The Swedish Traffic Conflicts Technique”.
PhD thesis. Lund University, 1987.
[42]
A. Laureshyn, Svensson, and C. Hydén. “Evaluation of traffic safety, based on micro-level behavioural data:
Theoretical framework and first implementation”. In: Accident Analysis & Prevention 42.6 (2010), pp. 1637–
1646. DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2010.03.021.
[43]
W. Schiff and M. L. Detwiler. “Information used in judging impending collision”. In: Perception 8.6 (1979),
pp. 647–658. DOI: 10.1068/p080647.
21


[PAGE 22]
[44]
K. H. Teigen. “The proximity heuristic in judgments of accident probabilities”. In: British Journal of Psychology
96.4 (2005), pp. 423–440. DOI: 10.1348/000712605x47431.
[45]
F. Camara and C. Fox. “Space invaders: pedestrian proxemic utility functions and trust zones for autonomous
vehicle interactions”. In: International Journal of Social Robotics 13 (2020), pp. 1929–1949. DOI: 10.1007/
s12369-020-00717-x.
[46]
Y. Jiao, S. C. Calvert, S. van Cranenburgh, and H. van Lint. “A Unified Probabilistic Approach to Traffic Conflict
Detection”. In: Analytic Methods in Accident Research 45 (2025), p. 100369. DOI: 10.1016/j.amar.2024.
100369.
[47]
Y. Jiao, S. C. Calvert, S. van Cranenburgh, and H. van Lint. “Inferring vehicle spacing in urban traffic from
trajectory data”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 155 (Oct. 2023), p. 104289. DOI:
10.1016/j.trc.2023.104289.
[48]
Q. Meng and X. Qu. “Estimation of rear-end vehicle crash frequencies in urban road tunnels”. In: Accident
Analysis and Prevention 48 (2012), pp. 254–263. DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2012.01.025.
[49]
D. S. Pawar and G. R. Patil. “Critical gap estimation for pedestrians at uncontrolled mid-block crossings on
high-speed arterials”. In: Safety Science 86 (2016), pp. 295–303. DOI: 10.1016/j.ssci.2016.03.011.
[50]
N. Anwari, M. Abdel-Aty, A. Goswamy, and O. Zheng. “Investigating surrogate safety measures at midblock
pedestrian crossings using multivariate models with roadside camera data”. In: Accident Analysis and Prevention
192 (2023), p. 107233. DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2023.107233.
[51]
G. Erion, J. D. Janizek, P. Sturmfels, S. M. Lundberg, and S.-I. Lee. “Improving performance of deep learning
models with axiomatic attribution priors and expected gradients”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence 3.7 (2021),
pp. 620–631. DOI: 10.1038/s42256-021-00343-w.
[52]
M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Yan. “Axiomatic Attribution for Deep Networks”. In: Proceedings of the 34th
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). Vol. 70. 2017, pp. 3319–3328.
[53]
F.-H. Chan, Y.-T. Chen, Y. Xiang, and M. Sun. “Anticipating accidents in dashcam videos”. In: Asian Conference
on Computer Vision. 2016, pp. 136–153.
[54]
A. P. Shah, J.-B. Lamare, T. Nguyen-Anh, and A. Hauptmann. “CADP: A Novel Dataset for CCTV Traffic
Camera based Accident Analysis”. In: 2018 15th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal
Based Surveillance (AVSS). 2018, pp. 1–9. DOI: 10.1109/AVSS.2018.8639160.
[55]
W. Bao, Q. Yu, and Y. Kong. “Uncertainty-based Traffic Accident Anticipation with Spatio-Temporal Relational
Learning”. In: ACM Multimedia Conference. May 2020. DOI: 10.1145/3394171.3413827.
[56]
J. Fang, D. Yan, J. Qiao, J. Xue, H. Wang, and S. Li. “DADA-2000: Can Driving Accident be Predicted by
Driver Attentionƒ Analyzed by A Benchmark”. In: 2019 IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference
(ITSC). 2019, pp. 4303–4309. DOI: 10.1109/ITSC.2019.8917218.
[57]
J. Fang, D. Yan, J. Qiao, J. Xue, and H. Yu. “DADA: Driver Attention Prediction in Driving Accident Scenarios”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23.6 (2022), pp. 4959–4971. DOI: 10.1109/TITS.
2020.3044678.
[58]
E. Sears, M. A. Perez, K. Dan, T. Shimamiya, T. Hashimoto, M. Kimura, S. Yamada, and T. Seo. A Study on
the Factors That Affect the Occurrence of Crashes and Near-Crashes. Tech. rep. Version V2. VTTI, 2019. DOI:
10.15787/VTT1/FQLUWZ. URL: https://doi.org/10.15787/VTT1/FQLUWZ.
[59]
C. K. Layman, M. A. Perez, T. Sugino, and J. Eggert. Research of Driver Assistant System. Tech. rep. Version V3.
VTTI, 2019. DOI: 10.15787/VTT1/DEDACT. URL: https://doi.org/10.15787/VTT1/DEDACT.
[60]
J. M. Hankey, M. A. Perez, and J. A. McClafferty. Description of the SHRP 2 Naturalistic Database and the
Crash, Near-Crash, and Baseline Data Sets. Tech. rep. Virginia Tech Transportation Institute, 2016.
[61]
Y. Jiao and S. Calvert. Bird’s eye view trajectory reconstruction of naturalistic crashes and near-crashes in the
SHRP2 NDS. Tech. rep. Version V1. VTTI, 2025. DOI: 10.15787/VTT1/EFYEJR.
[62]
B. Wilson, W. Qi, T. Agarwal, J. Lambert, J. Singh, S. Khandelwal, B. Pan, R. Kumar, A. Hartnett, J. K. Pontes,
D. Ramanan, P. Carr, and J. Hays. “Argoverse 2: Next Generation Datasets for Self-Driving Perception and
Forecasting”. In: Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
Track (Round 2). 2021. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=vKQGe36av4k.
[63]
G. Li, Y. Jiao, S. C. Calvert, and J. ( van Lint. “Lateral conflict resolution data derived from Argoverse-2:
Analysing safety and efficiency impacts of autonomous vehicles at intersections”. In: Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies 167 (2024), p. 104802. DOI: 10.1016/j.trc.2024.104802.
22


[PAGE 23]
[64]
R. Krajewski, J. Bock, L. Kloeker, and L. Eckstein. “The highD Dataset: A drone dataset of naturalistic vehicle
trajectories on German highways for validation of highly automated driving systems”. In: IEEE 21st International
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC). Maui, HI, United States, Nov. 2018, pp. 2118–2125.
DOI: 10.1109/itsc.2018.8569552.
[65]
H. Guo, K. Xie, and M. Keyvan-Ekbatani. “Modeling driver’s evasive behavior during safety–critical lane
changes: Two-dimensional time-to-collision and deep reinforcement learning”. In: Accident Analysis & Preven-
tion 186 (2023), p. 107063. DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2023.107063.
[66]
S. P. Venthuruthiyil and M. Chunchu. “Anticipated Collision Time (ACT): A two-dimensional surrogate safety
indicator for trajectory-based proactive safety assessment”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies 139 (2022), p. 103655. DOI: 10.1016/j.trc.2022.103655.
[67]
H. Cheng, Y. Jiang, H. Zhang, K. Chen, H. Huang, S. Xu, J. Wang, and S. Zheng. “Emergency Index (EI): A
two-dimensional surrogate safety measure considering vehicles’ interaction depth”. In: Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies 171 (2025), p. 104981. DOI: 10.1016/j.trc.2024.104981.
[68]
J. Eggert and T. Puphal. “Continuous risk measures for ADAS and AD”. In: Future Active Safety Technology
Symposium. 2017.
[69]
T. Puphal, M. Probst, and J. Eggert. “Probabilistic uncertainty-aware risk spot detector for naturalistic driving”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles 4.3 (2019), pp. 406–415. DOI: 10.1109/tiv.2019.2919465.
[70]
E. de Gelder, K. Adjenughwure, J. Manders, R. Snijders, J.-P. Paardekooper, O. Op den Camp, A. Tejada,
and B. De Schutter. “PRISMA: A novel approach for deriving probabilistic surrogate safety measures for risk
evaluation”. In: Accident Analysis & Prevention 192 (2023), p. 107273. DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2023.107273.
[71]
H. Summala. “Brake reaction times and driver behavior analysis”. In: Transportation Human Factors 2.3 (Sept.
2000), pp. 217–226. DOI: 10.1207/sthf0203\_2.
[72]
G. Markkula, J. Engström, J. Lodin, J. Bärgman, and T. Victor. “A farewell to brake reaction times? Kinematics-
dependent brake response in naturalistic rear-end emergencies”. In: Accident Analysis and Prevention 95 (Oct.
2016), pp. 209–226. DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2016.07.007.
[73]
J. Davis and M. Goadrich. “The relationship between Precision-Recall and ROC curves”. In: Proceedings of the
23rd international conference on Machine learning. 2006, pp. 233–240.
[74]
Y. Jiao, S. Calvert, S. van Cranenburgh, and H. van Lint. Data underlying the publication: Learning collision
risk proactively from naturalistic driving data at scale. 2025. DOI: 10.4121/9caa1e6c-9abd-4e36-ae28-
c9ea4542d940.
[75]
Y. Jiao. Yiru-Jiao/GSSM: First official release. Version 12Nov2025. 2025. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.17591050.
[76]
D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams. “Learning representations by back-propagating errors”. In:
Nature 323 (1986), pp. 533–536. DOI: 10.1038/323533a0.
[77]
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. “Long Short-Term Memory”. In: Neural Computation 9.8 (1997), pp. 1735–
1780. DOI: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[78]
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin. “Attention
is All you Need”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg,
S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett. Vol. 30. 2017.
[79]
Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pp. 2278–2324. DOI: 10.1109/5.726791.
[80]
D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel. “Gaussian error linear units (GELUs)”. In: arXiv (2016), preprint at https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1606.08415.
[81]
F. X. X. Yu, A. T. Suresh, K. M. Choromanski, D. N. Holtmann-Rice, and S. Kumar. “Orthogonal Random
Features”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg,
I. Guyon, and R. Garnett. Vol. 29. 2016.
23


[PAGE 24]
Appendix
A.1
SHRP2 trajectory reconstruction error
Figure A.1 shows the error distributions of bird’s eye view reconstruction of the trajectories derived in the Second
Strategic Highway Research Program’s (SHRP2) Naturalistic Driving Study (NDS). These include the root mean
squared error (RMSE) in subject speed, subject yaw rate, subject acceleration, and object speed, as well as the mean
absolute error (MAE) of object displacement. The errors are evaluated for each event in the categories of crashes,
near-crashes, and safe baselines.
0.0
0.2
0.4
Speed RMSE (m/s)
Probability density
=0.08
=0.06
=0.07
=0.12
=0.04
=0.02
Subject speed
0.000
0.001
0.002
Yaw RMSE (rad/s)
=0.00054
=0.00071
=0.00028
=0.00043
=0.00020
=0.00032
Subject yaw rate
0.0
0.5
1.0
Acceleration RMSE (m/s2)
=0.20
=0.13
=0.15
=0.05
=0.07
=0.04
Subject acceleration
0
1
2
Displacement MAE (m)
=0.54
=0.53
=0.34
=0.37
=0.56
=0.73
Object displacement
0.0
0.5
1.0
Speed RMSE (m/s)
=0.20
=0.14
=0.16
=0.13
=0.14
=0.13
Object speed
Crashes
Near-crashes
Safe baselines
Figure A.1. Reconstruction error distributions of crashes, near crashes, and safe baselines in the SHRP2 NDS. The mean values (µ)
and standard deviations (σ) are marked in each plot.
A.2
Contextual information details
As explained in Section 3.2, this study considers 3 categories of contextual information: current features (XC) including
the instantaneous states of interacting road users, categorical environment features (XE) of external conditions during
the interaction, and historical kinematic features (XT ) composed of time-series speeds and yaw rates within the past 2.5
seconds. Table A.1 provides a detailed list of these contextual features used in this study, as well as their encoding unit.
A.3
Neural network architecture
Out of the aim of validating the generalised surrogate safety measure (GSSM) rather than looking for the most powerful
architecture, our neural networks are relatively simple for computational convenience. As mentioned in Section 3.2, we
have 3 encoders and 1 decoder. The encoders for current features (XC) and environment features (XE) are multi-layer
perceptrons (MLPs, [76]), while the encoder for historical kinematic features (XT ) uses a single-layer long short-term
memory (LSTM, [77]) recurrent neural network. The encoded representation groups are then concatenated and passed
to the decoder, which uses the attention mechanism [78] to capture inter-feature relations and convolutional neural
networks (CNN, [79]) for intra-feature relations. Throughout the model, we use the activation function of Gaussian
error linear units (GELU, [80]). More descriptive details are as follows, while implementation details are referred to in
our open-sourced repository.
To ensure that feature attributions are meaningful, we design the encoders to let each attribution unit (a representation
vector) carry independent information from the others. Aligned with Table A.1, each scalar feature in XC is mapped to
its own representation vector. The categorical features in XE are first one-hot encoded and grouped into four chunks
(weather, lighting, road surface, and traffic density), and each chunk is then mapped to a separate representation vector.
For XC and XE, we use MLP encoders with 5 and 4 linear layers, respectively. The temporal features XT are encoded
into five representation vectors corresponding to the past 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, and 2.5 seconds. Concretely, we reverse the
time steps in the 2.5-second history and feed the reversed sequence into a single-layer unidirectional LSTM. From the
resulting output sequence, we take five representations at 0.5-second intervals, so that each one encodes the kinematic
features within 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, and 2.5 seconds closest to the current moment.
To enrich and regularise the latent representation, we append a set of orthogonal Gaussian random features [81] which
are deterministic and unique for a sequence of representation vectors. Seeing the encoded and enriched vectors as
tokens of different contextual information, we design the decoder to capture both global and local relations of the tokens.
We first use batch normalisation to align the ranges of all feature dimensions, and then stack 6 self-attention blocks, in
each of which the feed-forward network has 2 linear layers. Next, we apply a CNN with 2 layers of convolution and a
kernel size of 3. Lastly, we use two separate 3-layer MLPs to output the targeted parameters µ and log(σ2).
24


[PAGE 25]
Table A.1. Contextual information considered in this study.
Category
Attribution unit
Feature(s)
XC
Per each feature
{li, lj,
wi+wj
2
, |vi|, xvj, yvj, |vi|2, |vj|2, |vij|2, |vij|sgn(∆v), Ahj, ρij}t=0, optional ai,t=0
XE
Lighting condition
Darkeness (lighted),
darkness (not lighted),
dawn,
daylight,
dusk,
unknown.
Weather condition
No adverse conditions,
fog,
mist/light rain,
rain and fog,
raining, sleeting,
snow/sleet and fog,
snowing,
unknown.
Road surface
Dry,
gravel over asphalt,
gravel/dirt road,
icy,
muddy,
snowy,
wet,
unknown.
Traffic density
LOS A1: free flow, no lead traffic,
LOS A2: free flow, leading traffic present,
LOS B: flow with some restrictions,
LOS C: stable flow, manoeuvrability and speed are more restricted,
LOS D: unstable flow - temporary restrictions substantially slow driver,
LOS E: flow is unstable, vehicles are unable to pass, temporary stoppages, etc.,
LOS F: forced traffic flow with low speeds and traffic volumes that are below capacity,
unknown.
XT
In the passed 0.5 s
{ωi, |vi|, xvj, yvj}t∈{−0.5,−0.4,...,−0.1}
In the passed 1 s
{ωi, |vi|, xvj, yvj}t∈{−1.0,−0.9,...,−0.1}
In the passed 1.5 s
{ωi, |vi|, xvj, yvj}t∈{−1.5,−1.4,...,−0.1}
In the passed 2 s
{ωi, |vi|, xvj, yvj}t∈{−2.0,−1.9,...,−0.1}
In the passed 2.5 s
{ωi, |vi|, xvj, yvj}t∈{−2.5,−2.4,...,−0.1}
Note: for two interacting road users i and j, their yaw rates, velocities, lengths, widths, and headings are denoted by ω ∈[−π, π],
v, l, w, and h; the motion states are in a local coordinate system with the origin at the position of i and y-axis oriented along the
velocity direction of i; sgn(∆v) = sgn(|vi| −|vj|); Ah ∈[−π, π] denotes the angle between the heading direction and the y-axis;
ρij ∈[−π, π] is the angle in the polar coordinates of multi-directional spacing.
A.4
Hyperparameter settings
The performance of GSSM depends on a number of implementation choices such as learning-rate schedules, batch
sizes, and regularisation strengths. To ensure transparency and reproducibility, we report a full set of hyperparameters
used in the experiments in Table A.2.
A.5
Computation efficiency
As reported in Table 3, a GSSM has 773,286 parameters if the input context has XC only; when both XC and XE are
considered, there are 857,486 parameters; if XT is also included, the number of parameters becomes 885,664. The
dominant part of the parameters is of the decoder, correspondingly accounting for 95.92%, 87.46%, and 85.83% of all
parameters in a model. Such a model with fewer than 0.9 million parameters is fairly small for modern deep learning.
To quantify the computational cost, we further report the training time and inference time for the different GSSM
variants alongside other existing methods for comparison. Note that we implement TTC2D, ACT and TAdv in a
vectorised form for efficient large-scale evaluation. In contrast, EI is used as provided by its authors, as its formulation
does not readily admit the same level of vectorisation. Altogether, these results show that the proposed GSSM achieves
competitive computational efficiency while providing substantially richer, context-aware risk estimates.
25


[PAGE 26]
Table A.2. Hyperparameters set in this paper’s experiments.
Hyperparameter
Definition
Value
Random seed
Number that controls generation of pseudo-random values
131
Small value threshold
Threshold to consider a value smaller than it to be near zero
1e-6
Representation dimension
Number of variables in a piece of encoded representation
64
Perturbation noise
Standard deviation of the added Gaussian noise
1% of variable range
Max. epochs
Maximum epochs of training
150
Batch size
Number of samples used per update during model training
512
Initial learning rate
Learning rate at the beginning of model training
1e-4
Dropout
Probability for each value in a tensor to be set to 0
0.2
A.6
Performance curves in different interactions
Corresponding to Table 7, Figure A.2 shows the performance curves to compare GSSM and other two-dimensional
surrogate safety measures (2D SSMs) in different types of interactions. The curves are less smooth for interactions of
merging and with pedestrian/cyclist/animal because of the small number of test events.
(a) Event type distribution
1787
69.0%
611
23.6%
193
7.4%
Rear-end
Adjacent lane
Other lateral
116
29
17
11
8 6 42
Turning&Crossing
Merging
Pedestrian
Parked
Cyclist
Animal
Oncoming
Unknown
(b) ROC curves
0
20 40 60 80
40
60
80
100
True positive rate (%)
Rear-end
0
20 40 60 80
40
60
80
100
Adjacent lane
False Positive Rate (%)
40
60
80
100 Crossing/turning
0
20 40 60 80
40
60
80
100
Merging
0
20 40 60 80
40
60
80
100
With pedestrian/
cyclist/animal
(c) PRC curves
20 40 60 80 100
40
60
80
100
Precision (%)
20 40 60 80 100
40
60
80
100
Recall (%)
40
60
80
100
20 40 60 80 100
40
60
80
100
20 40 60 80 100
40
60
80
100
(d) ATC curves
1
2
3
4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
F1 score
1
2
3
4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Median time to impact (s)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
2
3
4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
2
3
4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Safety-critical
GSSM
ACT
TTC2D
Figure A.2. Performance comparison of GSSM and other 2D SSMs in alerting different types of safety-critical events. The GSSM
under comparison is S-CET, which is trained on SafeBaseline and uses contextual information of current features, environment
features, and historical kinematic features. (a) Types of the crashes and near-crashes with determined ground truth. (b) Receiver
operating characteristic curves for different types of events. (c) Precision-recall curves for different types of events. (d) Accuracy-
timeliness curves for different types of events.
26
